---
title: "The Science of Gratitude & How to Build a Gratitude Practice"
type: transcript
episode_date: "2021-11-22"
episode_number: 47
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
youtube_id: KVjfFN89qvQ
search:
  exclude: true
---

# The Science of Gratitude & How to Build a Gratitude Practice

## [00:00:00] Introduction: Gratitude Science & Surprises

Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are talking all about the science of gratitude. In part, we're doing this because of the upcoming Thanksgiving holiday, which of course, is all about giving thanks, gratitude, but also because there's a wealth of data showing that having an effective gratitude practice can impact a huge number of health variables; both mental health and physical health in positive ways. Things like cardiovascular health, things like relationships, things like mental health, things like physical and cognitive performance. And these are not small effects. These are very large positive effects.

However, in researching this episode, I was completely surprised as to what constitutes an effective gratitude practice. I, I think like many of you, would have thought that an effective gratitude practice simply involves writing down a few things or many things that we're grateful for, or thinking about those. Or really making an effort to somaticize or feel some of the elements of gratitude while writing out that list or thinking about that list. It turns out that an effective gratitude practice doesn't resemble that at all. The neuroimaging data, the physiological data, looking at things like inflammatory markers, other studies, purely looking at the psychology and the long and short-term effects of an effective gratitude practice, point to a completely different approach to using gratitude to positively impact health metrics. Fortunately, these are things that we can all do very easily. Some of them were actually fun. You can do them in a variety of contexts. So today we're going to talk about the science of effective gratitude practices, and we're going to describe what those are and how you can incorporate them into your life.

## [00:01:50] Controlling Heart Rate with Story

Before we dive into today's topic, I just want to highlight a particularly interesting set of findings from the literature. This is a study that came out in the journal Cell Reports, a Cell Press journal, an excellent journal. It's very relevant to today's topic. In fact, we're going to spend more time with this paper a little bit later in the episode. The study involved having subjects listen to a story. The subjects are all listening to the same story, but those subjects are not listening to it together. They're not rounded up in a circle or all in a room, they're in separate rooms or entirely separate locations on the planet, or they are actually brought into the laboratory on separate days. What this study found is that different subjects listening to the same story undergo the same variation in heart rate. In other words, the gaps between their heartbeats start to resemble one another in response to the same story.

Now, this is very interesting. This is a coordination of the physiology of the body in response to a narrative, a story in different people. And yet when they line up the heart rates of these different people who listened to the story at completely different times, they find that those heart rates map onto one another almost identically. It's really remarkable. We're going to talk about what this means in terms of coordination of neural circuits in the brain and neural circuits in the body, and the organs such as the heart, but also the lungs and other organs of the body, and what this means for changing one's overall state.

A key theme that's going to come up today again and again is the distinction between traits, which are kind of pervasive aspects of who we are and how we tend to react to different types of circumstances, and states, which are more transient. But what this study really starts to point to is that there are specific approaches that any of us can take in order to really rewire our nervous system, such that we are calmer, if we want to be calmer in certain circumstances, that we are more responsive in certain circumstances, if that's our goal. In my mind, there was no reason why the results had to be this way. Two people listen to the same story, why should their heart rates be almost identical? Very, very interesting and points to the power of narrative and story in coordinating our physiology. And this is something powerful that we can leverage.

## [00:04:33] Sponsors: ROKA, InsideTracker, Magic Spoon

Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. And keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system so I'm very particular about eyeglasses, sunglasses, and optical quality. ROKA understands the visual system and has designed their glasses accordingly. If you go to roka.com and enter the code huberman, you'll save 20% off your first order.

Our second sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. Getting regular blood work done is one of the key things you can do for your long-term health. And InsideTracker makes that process easy and gives you information about what to do with that data. If you go to insidetracker.com/huberman, you can get 25% off their plans. Our third sponsor is Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon makes a cereal that has zero grams of sugar, 13 to 14 grams of protein per serving, and only four net grams of carbs. And it tastes great. If you want to try Magic Spoon cereal, go to magicspoon.com/huberman to grab a variety pack and try it risk-free. If you don't like it for any reason, they'll refund your money no questions asked.

## [00:09:11] Major, Long-Lasting Benefits of Gratitude Practice

Let's talk about gratitude. And to begin, I'd like to emphasize the various aspects of mental and physical health that have been shown to benefit from a regular gratitude practice. There are studies showing that performing a gratitude practice twice or three times, or even just once a week, can lead to a pervasive, long lasting impact on subjective wellbeing. People report feeling happier, more meaning, joy, even awe for their life experience, simply in response to adding a gratitude practice. The key thing is it has to be the right gratitude practice. And we're going to talk about what the right gratitude practice looks like in just a little bit.

But there are additional benefits of a gratitude practice. There are studies showing that a regular gratitude practice can provide resilience to trauma, in two ways; it can provide a reframing and resilience to prior traumatic experiences — buffering people against the negative physiological effects and psychological effects of earlier trauma, but also inoculating them in many ways to any traumas that might arrive later in life. And today we will talk about how that's actually accomplished. It's actually accomplished by shifting the way that the fear and defense networks in the brain actually function.

The other thing that a gratitude practice does is it's been shown to benefit social relationships. But not just for the relationship in which you express gratitude. On the face of it, you might think, okay, if I express gratitude for somebody over and over, then I'm going to feel better about that person. And indeed, that is one effect of a gratitude practice — that's called a pro-social or interpersonal gratitude practice. But there are now several studies, recent studies in good journals pointing to the fact that a regular gratitude practice can also enhance one's social relationships across the board; in the workplace, at school, with family and romantic relationships, and even one's relationship to themselves.

So it's clear to me that an effective gratitude practice has an outsized effect on many, many aspects of mental and physical health. And the neurochemical, the anti-inflammatory, and the neural circuit mechanisms that gratitude can invoke are equally on par with some of the effects of pharmacology, of things like high intensity interval training and exercise, and other things that we think of as more potent forms of self-intervention. So if you are of the mindset that a gratitude practice is kind of weak sauce, buckle up, because the data actually points to the fact that a gratitude practice is a very, very potent way in which you can steer your mental and physical health in positive directions.

## [00:12:20] Prosocial vs. Defensive Thinking, Behaviors, & Neural Circuits

Gratitude is what we call a pro-social behavior or a pro-social mindset. Now, you can be grateful for something without it involving anybody else. So the social part isn't meant to convey anything about interpersonal relations, although it can. And today we're going to talk a lot about how interpersonal relations can be incorporated into a gratitude practice in really powerful ways. Pro-social behaviors are basically any behavior or mode of thinking that allow us to be more effective in interactions with other people, including ourselves.

Pro-social is not just a name we give these different tools and practices and mindsets. There are actual neural circuits in the brain that are specifically wired for pro-social thoughts and behaviors. And these are distinctly different from the circuits in the brain that are involved in defensive behaviors. We have circuits in the brain that are what we call appetitive — they are designed to bring us closer to things and to bring us into closer relation to the details of that sensory experience. And the neural circuits in the brain that are associated with aversive or defensive behaviors are actually antagonized, meaning they are reduced, when the pro-social circuits are more active.

So the framework here is that we have a kind of seesaw of neural circuits in the brain. One set that are pro-social and are designed to bring us closer to others, including ourselves, closer to certain sensory experiences. Whereas the defensive circuits involve areas of the brain associated with fear, but also areas of the brain and body that are literally associated with freezing or with backing up. The way to think about gratitude is that it falls under this category of pro-social behaviors, which are designed to bring us closer to different types of things, and to enhance the level of detail that we extract from those experiences.

The existence of these two neural circuits runs counter to a lot of the messaging put forth in the last century about the psychology of happiness. I'd like to read a quote from Sigmund Freud: "Our possibilities of happiness are already restricted by our constitution. Unhappiness is much less difficult to experience. We are threatened with suffering from three directions; one from our own body, which is doomed to decay and disillusion, and which cannot even do without pain and anxiety as warning signals. Two, from the external world, which may rage against us with overwhelming and merciless forces of destruction. And three and finally, from our relations with others, the suffering of which from this last source is perhaps more painful to us than any other."

What Freud is referring to there are those defensive circuits. And then of course was the emergence of the positive psychology movement, which was really about invoking the understanding and eventually the elucidation of the neural circuits for things like happiness and awe and affiliation — things we are calling pro-social circuits. What's really salient from the quote from Freud is that our default is to be concerned about the future, to be wrapped in our defenses, and to some extent that's true.

## [00:17:50] Why We All Need an Effective Gratitude Practice

Most of us need a gratitude practice. We need to do certain things in order to feel good and to feel happy. We actually have to put work into it. It is quite possible that there's an asymmetry in the way that these pro-social versus defensive circuits are set up, such that because defensive circuits are designed to keep us safe, psychologically and physically safe, they have more robustness, or they can actually drive our behavior more easily.

I'll give you an analogy in the system that I'm most familiar with as a neuroscientist, which is the visual system. In the visual system, we have parallel pathways. We have neurons in our eye that respond when things in our environment get brighter. And we have neurons in our eye that respond when things get darker. The circuits for detecting darkening are much more robust and much more numerous than are the circuits for brightness. And that is probably related to the fact that dark objects or experiencing looming, meaning incoming objects, is something that's vital to our survival.

The key thing for today's discussion is that gratitude turns out to be one of the most potent wedges by which we can insert our thinking, and as you also see, the physiology of our body, between these two circuits, and give a little more levity to the side of the seesaw that's associated with positive pro-social feelings. And what's really beautiful about gratitude practices is that if they're performed repeatedly, and not even that often, then one can actually shift their neural circuits such that the seesaw can actually start to tilt.

What this means is that a regular gratitude practice can shift the pro-social circuits so that they dominate our physiology and our mindset in ways that can enhance many, many aspects of our physical and mental health by default. So the succinct way of saying all this is: yes, we might be wired such that we have a greater propensity for unhappiness than happiness. But gratitude practices, provided they are the effective ones and performed regularly, can shift those circuits such that we are happier on average, even when we are not performing those practices.

## [00:21:22] Neurochemistry & Neural Circuits of Gratitude

Now I'd like to talk about some of the neurochemistry and neural circuits associated with gratitude and pro-social behaviors. Neuromodulators are chemicals that are released in the brain and body that change the activity of other neural circuits. They make certain brain areas more likely to be active and other brain areas less likely to be active. These neuromodulators have names like dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, epinephrine, and so on. The main neuromodulator associated with gratitude and pro-social behaviors tends to be serotonin.

Serotonin is released from a very small collection of neurons in the brainstem called the raphe nucleus, and a few other places in the brain. And the raphe neurons send axons out to numerous places in the brain. They tend to increase the activity of particular neural circuits that lend themselves to more approach to particular types of experiences — making the organism more likely to stay in an interaction with something, or even lean in and seek a more detailed interaction with that person, place, or thing.

Beautiful work from cognitive neuropsychologist Antonio Damasio has explored the so-called neural correlates of gratitude. And two main brain areas are activated by these serotonergic systems when people experience something that makes them feel gratitude. Those two areas are the anterior cingulate cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex. And the amount of activation scales with how intensely the person experiences the feeling of gratitude. Of these two brain areas, the one I'd like to focus on the most is the medial prefrontal cortex — the area of the brain that is involved in planning and in deep thinking and evaluation of different types of experiences, past, present, or future. The reason medial prefrontal cortex can be involved in so many different things, and the reason it's especially important for gratitude is that medial prefrontal cortex sets context.

## [00:25:10] Prefrontal Cortex Set Context

It sets context and it literally defines the meaning of your experience. I'm going to give a very physiological example of this. You have a number of circuits deeper in your brain that simply create some sensations or allow you to perceive certain sensations. Let's use the example of cold exposure. If you were to deliberately place yourself into an ice bath, it would be uncomfortable, even if you're adapted to cold. The discomfort is non-negotiable. However, if you are doing it because you want to, or because you have knowledge that there are particular health benefits, the medial prefrontal cortex can then control areas of your deeper brain, like the hypothalamus, to positively impact the neurochemicals that are released into your system.

The fact that you are doing this deliberately, and your knowledge that you are making the choice, that it's you that's deciding to put yourself through this discomfort, has been shown to create a very different and positive effect on things like dopamine, on anti-inflammatory markers in your immune system, compared to if someone pushes you into an ice bath, or if you are doing it because someone insists that you do it and you really don't want to.

Robert Sapolsky talked about a study in animals, which has also been shown in humans. If you take a mouse and it runs on a running wheel, which mice really like to do, there are many positive effects on reducing blood pressure, improvements in neurochemistry, et cetera, in that mouse. However, if there's a mouse in the cage right next to it that's trapped in the running wheel and it has to run every time the other mouse runs because the wheels are linked, that second mouse experiences negative shifts in their overall health metrics — blood pressure goes up, stress hormones go up — because it's not actually making the choice.

Medial prefrontal cortex is the switch that can take one experience and allow us to frame it such that it creates positive health effects. And the exact same experience framed as something we don't want to do, or that we are forced to do, can create negative health effects. So, gratitude is a mindset that activates prefrontal cortex, and in doing so sets the context of your experience such that you can derive tremendous health benefits. But you can't simply lie to yourself. You can't simply say, oh, every experience is a learning experience — your body will not react as if something is good for you just because you say it is. Neural circuitry is very powerful and very plastic, but when you lie to yourself about whether or not an experience is actually good for you, your brain knows.

## [00:30:10] Ineffective Gratitude Practices; Autonomic Variables

So what does an effective gratitude practice look like? Well, let's examine what an ineffective, what a poor gratitude practice looks like. Because therein lies some really important information, including the fact that I, and I think millions of other people out there, are doing it wrong. Most gratitude practices that you see online involve something like writing down or reciting, or thinking about five or ten or twenty things that you're especially grateful for. And then really trying to feel into some of those, really trying to think deeply about the emotions, the sensations, the perceptions that are associated with those particular people, places, and things on your list.

Most studies actually point to the fact that that style of gratitude practice is not particularly effective in shifting your neural circuitry, your neurochemistry, or your somatic circuitry — the circuits of your brain and body — toward enhanced activation of prefrontal cortex and enhanced activation of these pro-social neural networks that we were talking about earlier.

There is some evidence that if there's a shift in so-called autonomic arousal during these gratitude practices, they can be made slightly more effective. We have an aspect to our nervous system that we call the autonomic nervous system. It has one branch associated with making us more alert — the sympathetic arm — and then the parasympathetic arm, the calming aspect of the autonomic nervous system, associated with decreased heart rate and decreased breathing rate. It has been shown that if people are brought into a state of heightened sympathetic tone, meaning more alertness, the intensity of the emotions that they experience in their gratitude practice is enhanced, and the effectiveness of that gratitude practice can be enhanced.

This is seen nowadays somewhat commonly as having people do cyclic hyperventilated breathing — 25 or 30 very deep inhales and exhales — and then sit down to write out the things they're grateful for. And this makes sense: in that state of enhanced autonomic arousal, you are more alert and therefore able to bring more detail and richness to the perception of what's on your list. Across the board, increasing autonomic arousal enhances the potency of these list-based gratitude practices. But it turns out that the most potent form of gratitude practice is something quite different.

## [00:34:55] Key Features of Effective Gratitude Practices: Receiving Thanks & Story

The most potent gratitude practice is not one where you give gratitude or express gratitude, but rather where you receive gratitude, where you receive thanks. And this to me was very surprising. There are a number of studies about this now. One in particular that I find interesting is called "Prefrontal activation while listening to a letter of gratitude read aloud by a coworker face-to-face: A NIRS study." NIRS is a noninvasive form of imaging brain activity — a skullcap with wires that can measure neural activity without having to put a person into an fMRI machine, and it allows subjects to move around and engage with one another.

In this experiment, they had coworkers write a letter of gratitude to another coworker, unbeknownst to that coworker. And then they sat down together and imaged brain activity as the letter was being read and as it was being heard and received. It showed very robust effects on these prefrontal networks — pointing to the fact that receiving gratitude is actually much more potent, in terms of the positive neural circuit shifts it creates, than giving gratitude.

Now this raises a couple of important points. First, if you are somebody who is prone to write letters of gratitude, these have to be genuine expressions of gratitude — ideally in person or by phone or by text. You have within you a very potent form of shifting somebody else's neurology. But for many people who want to experience the positive effects of gratitude, it's probably not the most advantageous approach to just sit around waiting, hoping that someone's going to deliver letters or words of gratitude to you.

And there we go back to the important work of Antonio Damasio, who explored these neural correlates of gratitude. What they did was interesting. Rather than have people express gratitude, they had the subjects go into the brain scanner and they watched narratives, stories about other people experiencing positive things in their life. And in this case, these were powerful stories — stories about survivors of genocide. The subjects watching were not themselves survivors. Within these stories, there was a conveyance of a lot of struggle, but also small but highly significant features of their history that had led to their own feelings of gratitude. For instance, a woman described how she'd been sick for weeks, and then another prisoner who was a doctor found a particular medicine and literally saved her life. Or an ally gave a person a pair of glasses when their eyesight started to falter.

What's really important about this study is that these stories of other people receiving things that were powerful for their life trajectory are embedded in story. And the human brain is especially oriented towards story. We have neural circuits that like to link together past, present, and future, with different characters and protagonists. From the time we're very young until the time we're very old, story is one of the major ways that we organize information in the brain.

So what's important is not simply that these people survived genocide, and not just that they were helped along the way — it's that the description of their help is embedded in a larger story. The human subjects in this scientific study watched these powerful stories, and the neural circuits associated with pro-social behaviors and with gratitude became robustly active when the subjects started to feel some affiliation with the person telling the story. The subjects in this study are, in many ways, receiving a sense of gratitude through the narrative of another person.

I would have thought a great gratitude practice is sitting down and listing out all the things you're grateful for. That just seems so logical to me. But it turns out that these neurocircuits don't work that way. To really activate these circuits for gratitude and the serotonin system, one has to powerfully associate with the idea of receiving help. The subjects are experiencing empathy or sympathy for somebody else who received help. In the other study, the person hearing the letter was receiving gratitude directly, and that amplified the activity of these circuits. And that takes us to a larger theme of what these pro-social circuits are.

## [00:42:30] Theory of Mind Is Key

This is one that's most often associated with the autism literature, which is the idea of theory of mind. Theory of mind is the ability to attribute or to understand the experience of another without actually experiencing the thing that they're experiencing. It was actually a term that's been demonstrated in psychology and neuroscience, linked to some very robust findings associated with brain areas, particularly looking at autistic kids and non-autistic kids. The person largely responsible for developing theory of mind is Simon Baron-Cohen — I believe either the brother or the cousin of the comedian Sasha Baron-Cohen. Simon Baron-Cohen is a professor at Oxford University.

The theory of mind test involves you or a child sitting down and watching a video of a person going into a room, opening up a desk drawer, placing something in it — like a pen or a toy — and then leaving. Then another person walks into the room and is clearly looking for something. People who have strong theory of mind make the obvious conclusion that the person looking around is confused — they don't know where the toy is. Someone who is fairly far to one side of the autism spectrum will simply focus on the location of the object. They will say, well, it's in the second drawer. And if you ask them how the person who comes into the room feels, they'll say, well, it's in the drawer. They focus on the specific factual elements rather than placing their mind into the mind of the other person.

Theory of mind has very strong basis in these prefrontal cortex neural circuits that we were talking about. Because, as you now know, the prefrontal cortex sets context on what we see and experience. And the theory of mind task is a pure example of context setting — it's not about the factual location of objects, it's about the context. So basically theory of mind is your ability to put yourself into the mindset of another. And in order to get activation of these gratitude circuits, one needs to put themselves into the mindset of another, or to directly receive gratitude.

## [00:45:50] Building Effective Gratitude Practices: Adopting Narratives, Duration

So let's just take a moment and start to think about how we are going to build out the ultimate gratitude practice. It's very clear that receiving gratitude is powerful, but it's also very clear that waiting around to receive that gratitude is an impractical approach. There are methods that have been developed by my colleague at Stanford, Kelly McGonigal, and others that actually have developed things for the workplace — worksheets for coworkers and students to write out what they're thankful for and exchange them. Those are very useful practices. But in the absence of having other people to do these practices with, what we know for sure is that there has to be a real experience of somebody else's experience, and the best way to do that is story.

So in thinking about how to build out an effective gratitude practice, it's very worthwhile to find someone's narrative that's powerful for you. Many ways to think about this is: it's got to be a story that inspires you because of, for lack of a better phrase, the beauty of the human spirit, or the ability of humans to help other humans. The circuits for gratitude are such that we can exchange gratitude — we can actually observe someone else getting help, someone else giving help. And that observation of our species doing that for one another allows us to experience the feeling of a genuine chemical and neural circuit activation lift.

How would you do this? Well, people digest story in a number of different ways — movies, podcasts, books. There are a tremendous number of stories out there. It's clear that an effective gratitude practice has to be repeated from time to time, so the most effective protocol is going to be either to think into — and you could write this out if you like — when somebody was thankful for something that you did, and really start to think about how you felt in receiving that gratitude, and/or imagining or thinking deeply about the emotional experience of somebody else receiving help.

The way that one could do this is to find a story that's particularly meaningful for you, and then just take some short notes — bullet point notes about what the struggle was, what the help was, and something about how that impacts you emotionally. This is just for you. You don't have to share it with anybody. That kind of shorthand list serves as your shorthand for getting into this mode that we're calling gratitude. And this closely mimics what was done in these various studies.

There are studies looking at gratitude over many weeks — up to six weeks — and what one observes is so-called neuroplasticity of these circuits. The brain's ability to change in response to experience. These neural circuits start developing a familiarity with the narrative. For instance, let's say you sit down the first time you've found a story that you find particularly compelling. You've written down a few notes about that story just to remind you. And then you read those out and you think into the richness of that experience of receiving gratitude. The neural circuits become activated more easily with each subsequent repeat of the practice. This can be done literally for one minute or two minutes or three minutes — a very short practice. And if you have an experience of receiving gratitude or a story that's very potent for you, it becomes a sort of shortcut into the gratitude network, these pro-social networks. Meaning the activation of these circuits becomes almost instantaneous.

## [00:52:28] Narratives That Shift Brain-Body Circuits

Now there's another very clear and positive effect of using this narrative or story-based approach to a gratitude practice. And that's what story does for our physiology. Earlier in the episode, I mentioned this really incredible study in which listening to a story coordinated the heart rates of different individuals, and literally changed the way that their heart was beating. The title of the study is "Conscious processing of narrative stimuli synchronizes heart rate between individuals." The first author is Perez, published in Cell Reports. They looked at instantaneous heart rate using electrocardiogram — a way to look at heartbeats with very fine precision.

They also looked at the breathing of subjects as they listened to stories. Some of you may know that breathing and heart rate are actually linked to one another in a really interesting way. When you inhale, your heart rate speeds up a little bit, and when you exhale, your heart rate slows down. This is because of the movement of the diaphragm in your thoracic cavity — physicians call this respiratory sinus arrhythmia. So just remember: when you inhale, your heart rate speeds up, and when you exhale, your heart rate slows down.

Listening to a story produced very consistent gaps between the heart rates of people who were listening — different individuals in the study who were not located in the same place, listening on different days entirely — had very similar heartbeat patterns. What this means for your gratitude practice is that having a story that you can return to over and over again, even if it's not the entire story but just the shorthand bullet point version, will create a perceptible and real shift in your heartbeat and in your breathing.

An effective gratitude practice is one that can rapidly shift, not just the activation of circuits in your brain for pro-social behaviors, but also activation of particular circuits in your heart and in your lungs and the other organs of your body, such that you can get into a reproducible state of gratitude each time. An important component here is that there be some element of story, and that it be the same story over and over. As a consequence, that's going to shift your physiology into a more relaxed state, because typically that's the one associated with gratitude. The key thing is that you want to use the same story and keep coming back to it over and over again. That makes it a very potent tool that you can get a tremendous amount of benefit from with even as short as 60 seconds of practice.

## [00:56:15] You Can't Lie About Liking Something; Reluctance In Giving

You can't say, you know, I'm so grateful for this thing that I actually hate, and derive the benefits of a gratitude practice. The data also point to the fact that if you are giving gratitude, not just receiving it, that too has to be genuine. There's a really interesting study published in Scientific Reports, which is a Nature Research journal. The title is "Neural Responses to Intention and Benefit Appraisal are Critical in Distinguishing Gratitude and Joy." Basically what they did is they used functional magnetic resonance imaging to look at brain circuitry activation with very high precision. And they had people receiving money in the context of this experiment, with some knowledge as to whether or not the money that they were receiving was given to them wholeheartedly or reluctantly.

They also varied the extent to which the giver of the money — called the benefactor — was doing it wholeheartedly or seemed to be doing it somewhat reluctantly. And they looked at whether or not the sense of gratitude scaled with the amount of money received and/or the intention of the benefactor. What's remarkable is that while the amount of money given was a strong component in whether or not somebody felt that they had received gratitude, the stronger variable, the bigger impact, came from whether or not the person giving the money was giving it with wholehearted intention versus reluctant intention.

This tells us that genuine thanks are what count. Receiving genuine thanks is also a strong variable in determining whether or not we experience real gratitude, regardless of the size of a gift. You can't tell yourself that an experience was great, or that I got a lot of money and therefore it justified it even though I think they gave it to me reluctantly. That stuff stings for all the right reasons, because there are circuits in our brain and body that are oriented towards these pro-social interactions. What we are looking for as a species is to receive things from people that are giving them wholeheartedly. And that tells us that if we are the giver, we better be giving wholeheartedly, or we are undermining the sense of gratitude that someone is going to receive from us.

## [00:59:55] How Gratitude Changes Your Brain: Reduces Anxiety, Increases Motivation

I know that many people are probably interested in developing a gratitude practice that has long-lasting, maybe even permanent positive effects on their neural circuitry. So with that in mind, I want to turn our attention to a really interesting study entitled "Effects of gratitude meditation on neural network functional connectivity and brain heart coupling." To make a long story short, repeated gratitude practice changes the way that your brain circuits work. And it also changes the way in which your heart and your brain interact.

You're familiar with the fact that your brain controls your heart because you could be stressed about something perceived with your brain, and then your heart rate will speed up. You're probably also familiar with the fact that if your heart rate speeds up for some reason, you're probably thinking, well, what's making my heart rate speed up? That's because the brain and the heart are reciprocally innervated — they're talking to one another in both directions.

This study used a resentment intervention as a control — which I think is very interesting and quite different from gratitude. To make a long story short, a repeated gratitude practice could change the resting state functional connectivity in emotion and motivation-related brain regions. A regular gratitude practice could shift the functional connectivity of emotion pathways in ways that made anxiety and fear circuits less likely to be active, and circuits for feelings of wellbeing and motivation to be much more active. A gratitude practice is a twofer: if you do it regularly, you reduce the fear and anxiety circuits, you increase the efficacy of the positive emotion and feel-good circuits, and the circuits associated with motivation and pursuit are actually enhanced as well.

## [01:03:00] 5 Minutes (Is More Than Enough), 3X Weekly, Timing Each Day

Some people, those circuits are more robust than others. But the remarkable thing is one can shift these circuits in the direction that most people would like — more sense of wellbeing and motivation and less resentment and fear. And what's really cool about this study is that the interventions are only five minutes long. It's incredible. Five minutes long.

As we start to build out our ideal gratitude practice, we know that it has to have certain features. First of all, it has to be grounded in a story, probably a story that you've heard in its entirety at least once. But then you can have a shorthand version — the bullet points that I talked about before — that allow you to drop into that story or the emotional associations with that story. And that story should be one in which you are genuinely being thanked for something and it made you feel good, or it could be a story about someone else genuinely expressing thanks.

Your gratitude practice can be very brief. As brief as one minute, 60 seconds, or five minutes. Some of these papers involve people doing some calming breathing as they go into the gratitude practice — exhale-emphasized breathing, like physiological sighs — and then doing the gratitude practice, all within the five minute block. That's fine. But once a narrative has been set, I think just 60 to 120 seconds should be sufficient.

The question becomes, how often to repeat this gratitude practice. I can't point to any one study that says exactly how many times per week. So I'm going to throw out a number which is three times a week. And when should you do it? The best time of day to do this practice is when you first wake up in the morning, or before you go to sleep at night, or any time of day.

## [01:05:44] Empathy & Anterior Cingulate Cortex

There is an additional neurocircuitry shift that occurs with a regular gratitude practice. It relates to a structure I mentioned just briefly earlier, which is the ACC, or anterior cingulate cortex. This is an area of the brain that has several functions, but more and more data are pointing to the fact that the ACC is actually involved in empathy and is involved in understanding the emotional states of others in general. And there are several studies that point to the fact that in humans who have a regular gratitude practice, the ACC becomes more robustly engaged, even with these very brief gratitude practices.

We actually have a project in our lab, done in animal models, where animals observe other animals experiencing certain emotional states. And one of the brain areas that we've identified as important for this — it's kind of a primordial form of empathy — is the ACC. The anterior cingulate cortex seems to be an important hub for the generation and execution of empathy as it relates to feelings and empathic behaviors; altruistic behaviors of animals helping animals and humans helping other humans. So, if you want to be a more empathic person, a gratitude practice is also going to be very effective for that, especially using this narrative type approach where you are using someone else's narrative of receiving gratitude as a way to tap into your own sense of gratitude.

## [01:07:35] Reducing Inflammation & Fear with Gratitude

Thus far, we've mainly talked about the effects of gratitude on neural circuit activation. But we haven't talked a lot yet about the changes in health metrics — in things like inflammation or reductions in inflammation and immunity. So with that in mind, I'd like to describe the results of a really interesting recent study published in the journal Brain, Behavior and Immunity in 2021. The title of the study is "Exploring Neural Mechanisms of the Health Benefits of Gratitude in Women: A Randomized Controlled Trial." The first author is Hazlitt. And basically, what this paper showed was that women who had a regular gratitude practice showed reductions in amygdala activity — a brain area associated with threat detection, an intimate part of the fear network in the brain — and large reductions in the production of TNF-alpha (tumor necrosis factor alpha) and IL-6 (interleukin-6).

TNF-alpha and IL-6 are inflammatory cytokines. These are chemicals that exist in your body and are released from cells when there is damage or systemic stress. In the short-term they can be beneficial — they can call in signals for wound healing and repair of cells — but you don't want those levels to be too high or to remain elevated for too long. This study showed significant effects in reducing TNF-alpha and IL-6 in response to a gratitude practice. And because they also observed reductions in amygdala activation, it's likely that the direction of the effect is that there are neural circuit changes, which in turn shift the degree to which these inflammatory cytokines are released in the body.

Another interesting aspect of this study is that the reductions in amygdala activation and the reductions in TNF-alpha and IL-6 were very rapid — they occurred almost immediately after the gratitude practice was completed. And even though that study was performed exclusively on female subjects, based on the biology and circuitry of the amygdala and the biology of TNF-alpha and IL-6 performing this inflammatory role in both men and women, I don't see any reason why the results of that study wouldn't pertain to both men and women.

## [01:10:56] Serotonin, Kanna/Zembrin

Are there certain chemicals in our brain, or that we could enhance in our brain, that would enhance our gratitude practice? Indeed, there are. Earlier I mentioned the neuromodulator serotonin as having a powerful influence on the activation of neural circuits associated with pro-social behaviors and gratitude. Neuromodulators like dopamine and epinephrine and norepinephrine tend to place us into a state of external perception — a state of observing things and focusing on things outside the immediate reach of our body. They tend to put us in pursuit, or in thinking about things out in the future or away from our physical body. Whereas serotonin and some of the associated pathways like oxytocin tend to be associated with states of contentment with what we have within the confines of our body and our immediate experience. So they're not so much about pursuit, but about gratitude and appreciation for what we already have.

If one were to shift their chemistry toward higher levels of serotonin, you would, by all logic, experience heightened levels of gratitude. A couple of supplement-based legal over-the-counter approaches to this are things like 5-HTP, which is a precursor to serotonin. Some people will take 5-HTP to try and enhance their sleep, but I'm not a fan of doing that personally. By taking 5-HTP or tryptophan — an amino acid precursor to serotonin — one can run into the problem of disrupting the normal architecture of sleep cycles throughout the night. Some people are not so sensitive to 5-HTP or tryptophan and actually really like it, so you have to talk to your doctor and determine what works for you.

There's a new compound out there — a legal over-the-counter compound, at least it's legal in the United States. It's called Kanna, K-A-N-N-A. It also goes by the name Sceletium tortuosum, and it's sometimes called Zembrin, Z-E-M-B-R-I-N. It's an herb that is traditionally chewed prior to stressful endeavors. It very likely increases the amount of serotonin in the body, and pretty potently. It is generally taken in dosages of anywhere from 25 to 50 milligrams, and it creates a kind of pro-social, gratitude-circuitry enhancing effect because of the ways that it interacts with the serotonergic pathways of the brain.

One could imagine, if it's safe and right for you and legal where you live, enhancing serotonin by taking Kanna and then doing your gratitude practice. The logic is that supplements and pharmacology that increase a neurochemical will likely enhance the amplitude or intensity of that practice and make it a more potent form of inducing neuroplasticity — creating longer lasting or more robust brain changes. But that doesn't necessarily mean that you couldn't get to the very same place without it, by simply doing a slightly longer gratitude practice or putting a little bit more mental effort into it.

## [01:16:00] Neuroplasticity, Pharmacology, Brain Machine Interfaces

Neuroplasticity is not an event — it's a process, meaning it has many, many steps. It occurs during wakefulness, it's consolidated during sleep and so forth. Taking a substance that increases a neurochemical in your brain will likely, provided it's the right substance and it's the right practice, enhance the amplitude or the intensity of that practice and make it a more potent form of inducing neuroplasticity — meaning it will create longer lasting or more robust brain changes than if one hadn't increased their chemistry this way. But that doesn't necessarily mean that you couldn't get to the very same place without it, by simply doing a slightly longer gratitude practice or putting a little more mental effort into it.

I think the future of neuroplasticity really resides in not just one approach — not just neurochemistry, not just behavioral practices, not just brain machine interfaces or devices — but rather the convergence of multiple tools. So you could imagine enhancing serotonergic transmission using something like Kanna, combined with a gratitude practice. In the not-too-distant future, this will probably also be combined with some sort of noninvasive device to stimulate the prefrontal cortex at the same time. Please don't do that recreationally — those devices are for clinical use only currently.

The main effects of Kanna that have been documented in the scientific literature are minor but significant increases in cognition and executive function — a capacity also associated with prefrontal cortex — and reductions in anxiety. And that seems to be a common theme: reductions in TNF-alpha and reductions in amygdala activation, which would ostensibly lead to reductions in anxiety. Back to that push-pull of defensive anxiety and fear-like circuitry in the brain being antagonistic to the circuits associated with pro-social, feel-good, receiving good feelings type circuitry and events in life.

## [01:18:50] The Best Gratitude Practices: & How To, My Protocol

I'd like to just highlight the key elements of the most effective, at least to my knowledge, gratitude practice. I'm gleaning from the scientific studies I was able to find and combining the various findings of those studies into what I think is a very practical and certainly very effective gratitude practice for all the positive effects that we described.

First of all, that gratitude practice has to be grounded in a narrative, meaning a story. You don't have to recite or hear that story every single time you do the gratitude practice, but you have to know what that story was and what the gratitude practice references back to. Second, that story can be one of you receiving genuine thanks — where you are the one receiving the thanks and it's being given to you genuinely, wholeheartedly. Or it can be a story of you observing someone else receiving thanks or expressing thanks, and that has to be a genuine interaction as well.

What I recommend is, after you've established the story that you want to use for your gratitude practice, write down three or four simple bullet points that can serve as salient reminders of that story for you. I would recommend writing down something about the state that you or the other person were in before they received the gratitude, the state that you were in or the person was in after they received the gratitude, and any other elements that lend some sort of emotional weight or tone to the story. This could be three pages of text, if you like, or it could just be a couple of bullet points.

Then it's very simple: the entire practice involves reading off these bullet points as a cue to your nervous system of the sense of gratitude. And then for about one minute — which is a trivial amount of time — or maybe two minutes, or if you're really ambitious up to five minutes, just really feeling into that genuine experience of having received gratitude or observed someone else receiving gratitude. In terms of frequency, I think a good rule of thumb would be to do that about three times a week. The time of day doesn't really matter — I can't see why there would be any circadian effects. Some people like to do a gratitude practice before sleep at night, others do it first thing in the morning, and that's equally fine. The most important thing is that you do it at least three times a week.

So if we just take a step back from this protocol and compare it to what's typically out there in the literature — make a list of all the things you're thankful for, recite the things you're thankful for, count your blessings — I think everybody should be counting their blessings all the time. There's always something to be thankful for. But in terms of a scientifically grounded gratitude practice that has been scientifically demonstrated to shift your physiology at the level of your immune system and your neurocircuitry — reducing anxiety, increasing motivation, all these wonderful things that so many of us are chasing all the time as goals — a gratitude practice reveals itself to be an immensely powerful tool for any and all of us to use.

Discussions about gratitude date back hundreds, if not thousands of years. What we've done today is to take the modern science right up until 2021, and to really distill from that the neuroimaging data, the neurochemistry, the various aspects of brain-body connectivity, look at the protocols, and point to a simple but very effective protocol that certainly we could all use around Thanksgiving. But Thanksgiving is just one day throughout the entire year. I personally have been using a gratitude protocol for the last several years. But that protocol was based on my ignorance, really, about the scientific literature — mainly based on what I'd heard out there on the internet: listing out or thinking about or verbally reciting the things I'm grateful for. The sort of protocol that we arrived at today based on the scientific literature is distinctly different from that. And as a consequence, I've started to script out a protocol identical to the one I just described, and I intend to use that going forward.

## [01:24:25] Subscribe & Feedback, Supporting Sponsors, Supplements (Thorne)

If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us a comment and up to a five-star review. Also, please check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this episode — that's the best way to support this podcast. In addition, we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support this podcast at any level that you like.

During today's episode, and in many previous episodes, I mentioned supplements. Supplements aren't for everybody. But if you are going to use supplements, it's imperative that the supplements be of the very highest quality. For that reason we've partnered with Thorne — T-H-O-R-N-E — because Thorne supplements have the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients they include and the precision of the amounts of the ingredients they include in their products. They've partnered with every major sports team, as well as the Mayo Clinic. If you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman, and there you can see all the supplements that I take and get 20% off any of those supplements. Thank you for your time and attention today, learning about the science of gratitude. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.
