---
title: "Science-Based Tools for Increasing Happiness"
type: transcript
episode_date: "2022-11-14"
episode_number: 99
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
youtube_id: LTGGyQS1fZE
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:00] Happiness

Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing happiness. We're going to discuss the science of happiness, because indeed, there are excellent laboratories that have worked for many decades to try and understand what is this thing that we call happiness and what brings us happiness in the short and long term. In fact, we could probably point to happiness as one of the most sought-after states or commodities, or emotions. Whatever you want to call it, happiness is what many people are seeking in work, in relationships, and in general. And yet most of us can't really define exactly what happiness is or means for us. We can point to certain experiences, we can try and describe our states of mind and body, but most people recognize the feeling when we have it, and we certainly recognize the feeling of not being happy — whether or not that means simply not being happy as the absence of happiness or all-out depression.

Now one of the key problems in trying to understand happiness and, indeed, the science and psychology of happiness is that it does indeed involve other similar things — things like joy, and gratitude, and meaning. And indeed, many scientists and psychologists have argued for many, many decades about what happiness really is. Now we can come up with so-called operational definitions of happiness. Operational definitions are basically agreed-upon terms or agreed-upon definitions and conditions that will define something such as happiness, much in the same way that we can all probably come up with an operational definition of milk. But of course, milk can be cow's milk, it can be oat milk, it can be soy milk. So too, something like happiness can be micro-divided and sliced and diced into as many things as we decide.

Today we are really going to focus on three main things. First, we are going to define happiness as a brain state and as a state of mind and body. Second, we are going to talk about tools and practices for placing ourselves into states of happiness. While for most of us, we think of happiness as something that only arrives through the acquisition of some goal or some thing external to us, there is also something called synthetic happiness or synthesized happiness which turns out to be at least as powerful and perhaps even more powerful. Now I'll just say right off the bat that I'm not going to tell you that all you have to do is sit in a chair and imagine being happy in order to feel happy. Synthesizing happiness actually involves some very concrete steps that have been defined by excellent labs in psychology.

And then, third, we're going to talk about some of the misconceptions or what I would call the contradictions of happiness research. Most of you have probably heard about the general conditions for obtaining happiness — they always seem to circle back to get great sleep, have great social connection, pursue meaning, don't overextend on things like pursuing money. And while all of that literature is very powerful and informative, there is what I see as a contradiction. Which is, for many of us, including myself, especially in the years when I was in graduate school and a postdoc, there were times in which pursuing work and pursuing degrees and finding meaning in my vocation actually separated me from the opportunity to have quite as many social connections, or quite as much sleep, or quite as much exercise, or even quite as much sunshine. So all of the things that we're told that we need in order to access happiness oftentimes contradict with the pressures and the requirements of not just daily life but in building a life that allows us to have those resources.

So today, what you will finish this episode with is a set of tools and a framework for understanding the pursuit of happiness in the short and long-term as it relates to the research from psychology but also the neuroscience. My goal today is really to try and place that all into a structured framework so that you can know where you are in your journey or the landscape around happiness. And what I won't tell you is that you need to abandon all goals in terms of pursuing money, career, et cetera, and simply focus on relationships. There's excellent research that points to the fact that even rather shallow connections — connections between people that you happen to just see in the hallway on a regular basis, not even requiring close bonds of any kind — can be built into close bonds that can deliver a tremendous amount of genuine social connection, provided certain conditions are met.

## [00:06:27] Tool: Light Exposure Timing & Brightness Timing

Before we begin today's episode, I'd like to talk about a very specific tool that applies yes to our pursuit of happiness but actually to our pursuit of everything, including quality sleep and ongoing motivation. I've talked many, many times before on this podcast about the critical value of getting regular bright light, ideally sunlight, in your eyes within the first hour of waking. Or if the sun isn't out when you wake up in the morning, to turn on a lot of bright artificial lights and then get sunlight in your eyes for anywhere from 5 to 20 minutes, depending on how cloudy it is in the early part of the day. Absolutely outsized effects on mood and focus during the day and quality of sleep at night.

Now there's another sort of central tenet of getting great sleep and improving mood and focus throughout the day. And that's to avoid bright artificial light exposure to your eyes between the hours of about 10 PM to 4:00 AM. There are several studies that point to the fact that one of the major issues with getting bright light in your eyes between the hours of 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM is that it has a negative impact on the so-called dopaminergic or dopamine circuits of the brain and body, which can enhance depression — that is, lead to ongoing lower mood and affect.

Now it turns out that there are powerful ways to offset some, not all, but some of the negative effects of viewing artificial lights between the hours of 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM. And one of the most powerful ways to do that is to simply adjust the overall brightness of your artificial lighting throughout the day and in the evening. One of the issues nowadays is that people are simply not getting enough bright light in their eyes from sunlight or from other sources during the daytime, and they're getting far too much bright light in their eyes largely from artificial sources in the evening and at night.

So a very simple yet powerful solution, supported by peer-reviewed research in humans, is to try and make your indoor working and/or home environment during the day as bright as possible. And then much dimmer from the hours of 6:00 PM until bedtime. That's going to be a far better pattern for your sleep-wake cycles, focus, mood, et cetera than what most people do, which is to keep the indoor lights rather dim during the day when they need more photons, and then turn the lights much brighter in the evening.

There's an even simpler solution, which is to get some bright sunlight in your eyes right around the time of sunset. Studies on humans have shown that by getting some bright light in your eyes, ideally from sunlight, in the late afternoon and evening — facing the sun around that time for anywhere from 5 to 10 minutes, or even just two to five minutes — can adjust the sensitivity of neurons in your retina that communicate light information to the brain. This makes it such that in the evening when you use artificial lights, they aren't going to have as much of a detrimental effect on your dopamine system and for impairing your sleep. So the idea is: as much bright light as possible from the time you wake up until around 6:00 or 7:00 PM, and then as little bright light as you can manage in the evening and nighttime hours.

Now I realize today's episode is about happiness, it's not about sunlight or dopamine. And yet, if you're not optimizing your sleep and if you are using or being exposed to light at the wrong times of the day/night cycle, that is going to make it very hard for the other sorts of practices that relate to happiness to have their full impact. The landscape of your chemicals and your hormones is powerfully controlled by not just the brightness of light but the timing of light and your exposure to light. And it's been proven that even these small steps — which are completely cost-free and require just a few minutes of time — can allow you to greatly adjust your neurochemistry and your hormones in the direction of better mood, better sleep, and happiness.

## [00:14:14] Thesis, InsideTracker, Helix Sleep

Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools for the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.

Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. I've been using Thesis for over a year now, and I can confidently say that their nootropics have been a game changer for me — I like their nootropic for clarity before cognitive work, and their nootropic for energy before intense workouts. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman. Take their 3-minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. Use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box.

Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and meet your health goals. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans.

Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix makes mattresses and pillows of the absolute highest quality. They match the design of the mattress to your unique sleep needs through a brief quiz on their website. For me that was the Dusk mattress — not too firm, not too soft, and ideal for my sleep patterns. Go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their brief sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress. You'll get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows.

## [00:17:51] Imprecise Language for Happiness

Let's talk about happiness. This thing that everybody seems to want, and yet not everybody can agree on what exactly it is or how to get it. Now I want to start by quoting a previous guest on the Huberman Lab podcast — a colleague of mine at Stanford School of Medicine, Dr. Karl Deisseroth, who's both a bioengineer and a clinician. He once said something to the extent of: we don't know what other people feel. In fact, most of the time, we don't even really know how we feel. One of the things he was emphasizing was the fact that language — things like the word happiness, or joy, or meaning, or pleasure, or delight — are actually not very precise when it comes to describing our brain and body states.

So, for instance, if I tell you I'm feeling pretty happy, I know what that means for me, at least in this moment, but you don't really know whether or not it means the same thing as what "pretty happy" means for you. And it's important for us to acknowledge this because at this point in human history, we don't really have a measurement like body temperature or heart rate that gives us anything better than a crude correlate or an estimate, at best, of what happiness is. It doesn't mean that we cannot have a strong data-driven conversation about happiness and what brings us to a state of happiness. But it's very important to understand that language is not an ideal and maybe even a deficient tool in terms of describing our emotions and our states of mind and body.

## [00:20:26] Happiness: Neuromodulators & Neurotransmitters

Now equally important is to understand that while we do have neurotransmitters — that is, the chemicals that are released between neurons, nerve cells, that allow neurons to communicate, things like glutamate and GABA — we also have what are called neuromodulators. These are chemicals also released by neurons that impact the electrical firing and chemical release of other neurons — things like serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine, and epinephrine. Neuromodulators and neurotransmitters are always present in a cocktail in our brain and body. They are present in different ratios and at different levels. So we need to completely discard the idea that any one neurotransmitter or any one neuromodulator is solely responsible for a state of happiness or for a lack of happiness.

That said, it is true that for people that tend to have lower baseline levels of, for instance, dopamine, their self-reported levels of happiness tend to be lower than for those that have greatly elevated baseline levels of dopamine. This can be best appreciated at the extremes — in conditions like Parkinson's disease where people's levels of dopamine in their brain are severely depleted, or in drug-addicted individuals that are in a withdrawal state. Those individuals do tend to be more depressed, they tend to have lower affect, and they are less happy. At the opposite extreme, an individual who is in a manic phase of bipolar will tend to have very elevated levels of dopamine, talking a mile a minute, not requiring sleep, and finding every idea exciting. We did an entire episode about bipolar disorder, so if you'd like to learn more about that, please check out that episode.

In the context of neurochemistry and happiness, what I really want to drive home is this notion that the cocktail of neuromodulators really is important. There isn't going to be some one neurochemical fix that will make you happy. Rather, it's about the pattern — about the nature of the overall cocktail and the ratio of various neuromodulators and neurotransmitters. It's also about the circuit, which brain areas are being activated and how. So while dopamine is clearly important to happiness and to the anticipation of reward and the experience of reward, serotonin is also important, as are other neuromodulators. And the various experiences and things that we do, tools that we can use, and so on, are going to impact these neurochemicals in the directions that favor happiness.

## [00:26:32] Harvard Happiness Project

There have been some excellent studies on happiness. One form of these studies is individuals coming into a laboratory and participating in an experiment over the course of a day or months. The other form is so-called longitudinal study, where individuals are studied over a very long period of time — ranging from months to years and sometimes even decades.

Let's talk about one of the more famous and perhaps the longest-running longitudinal study on happiness. This is a study that was initiated or conceived in 1938 at Harvard University — the so-called Harvard Happiness Project. Some of you probably heard about this. It involved Harvard College sophomores and other individuals who were incorporated into the study as well. It's a study that initially had more than a couple of hundred subjects. Because it is one of the few studies, perhaps the study, that has allowed us to understand happiness in our species over a very long period of time.

A number of things have emerged from that conversation. First of all, it's been discussed many, many times that the total amount of income that an individual makes does not seem to directly relate to their level of happiness. Now a lot of people take that point and think, oh, money doesn't matter. Other people hear that point and think to themselves, yeah, right, easy to say if you have a lot of money. I agree that while money or total resources itself does not predict happiness in any kind of direct way, that is not the same thing as saying having very few resources will make you happier.

People will say money can't buy happiness — and indeed, that's true. If you look at this longitudinal study or you look at other studies, once people get past a certain level of income relative to their cost of living, the amount of happiness does not scale with that income. That is, for every additional $1,000 or $10,000 that they earn, they don't report being that much happier on a daily basis. That said, I venture the argument that while money truly cannot buy happiness, it absolutely can buffer stress. If you can hire help, hire nannies, hire assistance with babysitting or night nurses, that won't offset some of the stress associated with lack of sleep.

## [00:29:22] Income & Happiness; Social Interactions & Peer Group

I certainly experienced this during graduate school — I experienced both sides of the equation. I made very little money as a graduate student, but I was in the laboratory all the time, and that's where I wanted to be. So my level of stress was actually pretty low because I was investing all my time and energy into the very thing that I knew would eventually help bring me more resources. When I moved from being a graduate student to a postdoc, my income went up by about 30% to 40%. But because of where I moved and because of the times, my cost of living went way, way up and I was extremely stressed. So it wasn't my absolute income — it was my absolute income relative to my cost of living.

There's also this notion of peer group. When I was a graduate student in a small town, I had access to most, if not all, of the social gatherings because they were all very low cost — people aggregating at the farmer's market, volleyball games, going out to eat. When I transitioned to being a postdoc, I made more money, but cost of living went up. And my peer group tended to want to engage in the same kinds of activities that people in that larger city were engaged in. Peer group has a tremendously powerful influence on whether or not we gauge the amount of money that we have as bringing us happiness or not.

So it's not just about being able to pay your rent. It's also about being able to access the kinds of social interactions that you deem are correct for you at that stage of life. If you can meet all the demands of rent and food, but you are socially isolated because your peer group is engaging in activities that you either don't have time for or don't have the financial resources for, that can actually severely impact our rating of what we call happiness.

One other major finding of the Harvard longitudinal study is that much as you've heard — no one on their deathbed says they wish they had worked more — well indeed, the total amount of time that one spends working does not seem to determine one's happiness. And yet I also want to earmark that result as one that we need to parse a bit more carefully. Because work, last time I checked, is the way typically that people earn an income. And income is often a way that people have access to things like recreation that opens up the opportunity for more social connection. So we have to be careful with how we interpret these blanket statements that have become very popular — that money doesn't determine happiness and that the amount that you work isn't going to determine happiness.

## [00:37:20] Work, Sense of Meaning & Happiness

In the not-too-distant future, we will do an episode of this podcast on meaning and what constitutes meaning in a given endeavor, work or otherwise. But much of the psychology of the last century, and still today, focuses on this feature of meaning as a critical one in terms of what makes us happy and what doesn't make us happy, certainly in the long term. I can certainly say for myself that learning and teaching, and doing research in my laboratory brings me tremendous feeling of meaning and happiness. Some people consider their work simply a way to gain a paycheck, and other people find that they would do the very work they do regardless of whether or not they were paid.

So this idea that money isn't important or that work is not as important as we deem it to be, that also needs to be considered from a number of different perspectives. By no means am I trying to undermine the data of these impressive studies. But I think we do have to be cautious in our discussion of results like these because the internet is replete with conversations about the big factors that the Harvard happiness study has found — conversations that are often somewhat divorced from the nuance of the original findings.

## [00:40:13] Toolkit for General Wellbeing

Now I want to step back and offer a brief synthesis of the general wellbeing toolkit before we proceed further into specific tools. Some of the basic conditions for general wellbeing and happiness are well-established:

First and foremost, getting adequate sleep and optimizing it as much as possible — getting bright light early in the day and avoiding it in the evening and at night. The light exposure protocol is probably the single most impactful zero-cost tool for establishing a neurochemical environment that is conducive to happiness on an ongoing basis. Second, exercise. Both cardiovascular and resistance exercise have been shown to have powerful effects on mood and on many of the neurochemical systems that underlie our sense of well-being and happiness. Third, eating a nutritious diet. There's extensive literature showing that the kinds of foods that we eat have a powerful influence on our gut microbiome, and through the gut-brain axis, powerful influences on our mood. Fourth, social connection. We will talk about this a lot more today. Fifth, having some sense of meaning and purpose, which can come from work, from vocation, from relationships, from volunteering, or from any number of other things. These general features have been supported repeatedly by a variety of longitudinal and shorter-term studies.

## [00:43:06] Happiness Across the Lifespan, Does Having Children Make Us Happier?

There's a general body of literature that suggests that happiness takes the form of a U-shape across the lifespan. That is, people tend to report being fairly happy early in life, less happy in middle age, and then increasingly happy again in their later years. Now the interpretation of this result is somewhat difficult because if we're not careful, we might interpret it as meaning that life is going to get progressively less happy the further we get from childhood, until we are old again, when happiness returns. That's not quite the right interpretation.

The reason happiness appears to go down in the middle years of life for many people is thought to be related to the increased demands and responsibilities of those years — particularly, the demands of raising children and of career building. Children, of course, represent an enormous increase in the demands on most people's lives. Does having children make people happier? This is a perennially debated topic. The data on this are quite mixed. In fact, looking at studies taken in the moment and asking parents whether they are happy in the moment of taking care of their children, often that answer is not necessarily yes — because many of the daily tasks of parenting are not themselves pleasurable in the moment. However, when people look back and evaluate their lives as a whole, having children is often rated as one of the highest sources of meaning and happiness. So the data on children and happiness really depend on whether you're sampling happiness in the moment or evaluating it over a longer arc.

This u-shaped function of people being happier earlier in life and then reporting feeling far less happy and then happiness returning to them is something that I do believe should be repeated in modern times, taking into account that people are tending to get married later, many are opting to not have children. So, for instance, the question arises whether or not that u-shaped curve should have a bump down at the bottom of the u among those that opt not to have children, because the argument was made that the reason why happiness is lower when people are in their 30s, 40s, and 50s is because they're devoting more time to raising their children and devoting more time to work. That would be an interesting test, I think, of whether or not the total load of responsibility is really what's correlating with reported happiness or not.

## [00:47:33] AG1 (Athletic Greens)

I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin-mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day, is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important — it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and they'll give you five free travel packs and a year supply of vitamin D3K2.

## [00:50:20] Birthdays & Evaluated Happiness

Now one very consistent finding that has absolutely stood the test of time — people tend to report feeling lower levels of happiness, believe it or not, on their birthday. The argument for why this is the following: typically, we go through our year not comparing ourselves to our peers terribly much. Whereas on our birthday, we get a snapshot of where we are in the arc of time, or at least in our life. And many people report feeling rather low on their birthday because they use that as a benchmark or a window into the things that they have not accomplished — the things that, despite being age blank, they still haven't accomplished.

So that's interesting because what it really points to is two things. One, the extent to which much of our feelings of happiness are relative, in particular relative to our peers — so there's that social aspect again. And the fact that most of the time, we are not very good at orienting ourselves in the longer arc of time. We're pretty good at knowing where we are in the arc of a day, or the arc of a week, or the arc of a month, or even a year, but most of us are not very good at reflecting on where we are in our life arc.

## [00:52:45] Smoking, Alcohol & Happiness

There are things that are anti-correlated with happiness. The Harvard happiness project has reported that people who are chronic smokers of nicotine and chronic consumers of alcohol — in particular, alcoholics, that is people who suffer from alcoholism or what is sometimes called alcohol use disorder — that is strongly anti-correlated with happiness. I should also mention that the family members and, in particular, the romantic partners of people who are chronic smokers and the partners of people who are chronic alcohol users often will report lower levels of happiness as well. This study from the Harvard happiness project really has strong data supporting the fact that avoiding being a nicotine smoker — and that alcohol consumption beyond about two drinks per week — is detrimental for various aspects of health and self-reported happiness.

## [00:54:23] Trauma & Happiness, Lottery Winner vs. Paraplegic Accident

And, of course, there are other things that you could imagine would relate to a lack of happiness — for instance, a major trauma, physical or emotional. That could include the loss of a major relationship, a death of a close one, being the victim of a violent crime, and things of that sort. And yet it's been argued, in fact strongly argued, that when you look at people's levels of happiness after a trauma, that if you wait about a year or so — sometimes even as short as three months after a trauma — people's self-reported levels of happiness are not significantly lower than they were prior to the trauma.

Now I very much want to highlight, underline, and bold and asterisk that statement as one that we really need to explore carefully. Because there are other data that strongly point to the fact that major life traumas can severely disrupt one's sense of happiness and well-being. A useful definition of trauma is one that was supplied by a former guest on the Huberman Lab podcast, Dr. Paul Conti, who's a psychiatrist who's written a book called Trauma — something that fundamentally changes the way that our brain and body function in a way that makes other aspects of living more challenging. An event, either emotional or physical, or both, that fundamentally changes the way that our nervous system functions in a way that prevents us from enjoying daily activities.

One of the basis of that general line of thinking is a now-classic and very important talk that was given by Professor Dan Gilbert on the science of happiness. One of the points that he makes in that talk — grounded in research carried out by his laboratory and other laboratories — is that he poses a question. He says, let's do a quiz. Would you rather be someone who wins the lottery, or someone who was recently made paraplegic, losing use of their legs? And then he goes on to state that one year after people have won the lottery versus have become paraplegic, their self-reported levels of happiness are the same.

However, in a subsequent podcast given by Dr. Dan Gilbert just a few years ago, he corrects himself. What he says is that he misspoke in that earlier talk. What the data actually show is that the difference in self-reported levels of happiness for those that have been rendered paraplegic versus those who've won the lottery is not as great as one would expect — but it's not zero. People who are rendered paraplegic, in fact, are reporting themselves as less happy than they were prior to their injury. And certainly their levels of happiness are lower than those that won the lottery. I think it's important to be aware of that discrepancy, because it's something that was lost in the communication around those results the first time around.

So to be very clear about what this study did and didn't show: when people win the lottery or acquire wealth through inheritance — some form of wealth acquisition that was sudden and that wasn't preceded by a specific effort to gain that wealth — that led to increases in self-reported happiness compared to prior to the win, but it wasn't as substantial as you might imagine. And while it is true that people who are rendered paraplegic or who undergo psychological or physical traumas of various kinds are remarkably resilient in many cases and can still manage to go about life and work and engage in relationships, there is a visible decrease in overall levels of happiness and well-being. And that's certainly true one year out from the trauma.

So we do need to reframe this idea that whether or not you win the lottery or become paraplegic or suffer some major trauma, your levels of happiness are going to be the same three months or a year later. I don't think that's accurate. And in fact, Dr. Dan Gilbert emphasized that that's not accurate even in that initial study.

## [01:05:05] Synthesizing Happiness

Now there is an important point that we can really credit Dan Gilbert and others in the field of psychology with, and that we owe them a great debt of gratitude for: we do have far more control over our levels of happiness than we might think. And many of the things that reside at that level of control — the things that we can do and think and say and access — don't come from external things. Rather, there are things that we can do that can allow us to so-called synthesize happiness.

This notion of synthesizing happiness, or synthetic happiness as it's sometimes called, can sometimes ruffle people's feathers a bit. Because people immediately flip to the idea that you're just going to tell me to be grateful for what I have or to just navel-gaze or just to imagine that I'm happy. But that's really not what synthetic happiness is about at all. Synthetic happiness actually has to do with some really important larger principles about the way that our emotional system and the way that the reward systems of our brain really function. Things like the hedonic set point. Or the dopamine system of anticipation of rewards versus receiving rewards — our anticipation of something positive oftentimes leads to greater increases in the sorts of neurochemicals that support a state of happiness and well-being than the actual acquisition of the thing that we're trying to obtain.

I want to point out at the outset that synthetic happiness, while it might sound synthetic — A.K.A. false — it's anything but. It actually turns out to be among the more and perhaps the most potent form of happiness that we can all access. And this is where themes related to our control over our own internal state really become not only valid but very powerful.

Dan Gilbert and others have explored how opportunity and choice — that is, freedom — can and can't lead to states of happiness. And the results of those studies are very solid and, frankly, very surprising. Until you understand the results, and once you do, I think you will immediately see areas of your own life that you can start to access more happiness, again genuine happiness, simply by framing certain choices in a particular way and maybe even by eliminating choices.

## [01:09:18] Natural Happiness & Synthetic Happiness; Music

I'd like to focus on the research aimed at understanding what increases our levels of happiness. I'd like to frame this under the umbrella of two major themes.

The first theme is so-called natural happiness. Natural happiness is the sort of happiness that most of us are familiar with — the kind of happiness that we expect to have if we complete a degree, or we find a mate, or we make a certain income or find work that we enjoy on a regular basis. All of those are forms of happiness that, from a very early time in development, we are taught exist. Even when we are very young, we are told that our birthday is coming and that we are going to get presents, and those presents are going to bring some level of joy or happiness. That general notion of natural happiness, of course, persists into adolescence, into young adulthood, and into adulthood.

And yet, as I mentioned a little bit earlier, there's also this notion of synthetic happiness. Some of the more interesting and exciting research in the fields of psychology and neuroscience point to this idea of synthetic happiness as at least as powerful a source of happiness as natural happiness — again, at least as powerful and perhaps even more powerful. Of course, one has to take a slightly different view of what happiness is in order to accept this idea that we can create happiness for ourselves. But it's important to point out that synthetic happiness also requires that certain situational or environmental conditions be met.

Work by Dr. Gillian Mandich and colleagues in the field of happiness education points to the fact that while having a certain environmental sound, musical tone, or visual feature in a given space is necessary for a state of happiness, it is not alone sufficient. What is required is that individuals not only be placed into an environment that contains music or visual items that can induce states of joy or happiness or positive anticipation, but that they also be given some sort of instruction as to how to synthesize happiness inside of that environment.

## [01:13:45] Tool: Synthesizing Happiness: Effort, Environment & Gratitude

So the environment and self-directed work at being happy are both important, and they interact with one another. If you're trying to think about how to improve your levels of happiness, the research essentially says that you would be smart to try and adjust your home environment and work environment so that it is cheerful to you. Maybe that means a plant. For me, one of the things that was really critical was I love aquaria — I had multiple fish tanks in my laboratory. Having either silence if you love silence, or certain forms of music. I do also use 40 Hz binaural beats. I particularly like listening to Glenn Gould while I work or listening to whale song, because it fills the space in a way I find pleasant and doesn't have structure I can follow.

These happiness inventories — focusing on things that one is grateful for, things that they particularly enjoy — also turn out to be important sources of creating synthetic happiness. The point is that environment and self-directed work at being happy are both important, and they interact with one another.

There's a classic study from AMES in 2004 that was focused on gratitude. The basic takeaway of that research is that it turns out receiving gratitude is a more powerful stimulus for the release of neurochemicals and activation of brain areas associated with so-called prosocial behaviors and feelings of well-being — including happiness — than giving gratitude. But also, observing stories in the form of movies or books or other narratives of other people receiving help is also a very powerful stimulus for gratitude and well-being. What the study from AMES showed is that gratitude as a state of mind and as an emotion does not exist in a vacuum. It's not independent of our surroundings.

The impact of gratitude and happiness is far more potent when there's a reciprocity — when the person receiving understands something about the person that's giving to them and understands that the person is giving genuinely. The feelings of well-being for the giver are far greater when the person receiving it genuinely needed the thing that they are receiving. So the important finding within the research, again and again, is that happiness doesn't exist in a vacuum. It's partially our own responsibility to synthesize happiness, but it's also dependent on interactions with your environment — physical environment and social environment.

## [01:24:50] Tool: Pro-Social Spending/Effort, Happiness

This leads me to a discussion of one of the major scientific findings in the realm of what sorts of mindsets and behaviors can, in fact, lead to happiness. This is a paper that was published in 2008 by Elizabeth Dunn and colleagues in the Journal Science — a very high-impact journal. The title of this paper makes fairly obvious what the paper is about: "Spending Money on Others Promotes Happiness."

What the study is based on is the fact that income, provided one's income meets a certain level of basic needs, indeed has been shown to have only a weak effect on overall happiness. Quoting from the paper: "income has a reliable but surprisingly weak effect on happiness within nations, particularly once basic needs are met."

This paper explored something called prosocial spending — a phenomenon where people are taking a certain portion of their income and they are giving it to others. Often for causes or for things that they think are important to see happen in the world or change in the world. What the study found was that higher prosocial spending was associated with significantly greater happiness, with a very statistically significant effect. The effects of income and prosocial spending were independent and similar in magnitude, whereas personal spending remained unrelated to happiness.

And here is the remarkable finding, and I'm going to read that again just to make sure it hits home: "employees who devoted a greater fraction of their bonus to prosocial spending — that is, giving away money to others — experienced greater happiness after receiving the bonus. And the manner in which they spent that bonus was a more important predictor of their happiness than the size of the bonus itself." So the actual bonus, the receiving of the money, led to greater increases in happiness if they gave it away. And the act of giving it away itself led to greater increases in happiness than receiving the bonus.

The takeaway from this study and studies like it is pretty obvious: to the extent that we can, whatever percentage of our own income or effort that we can afford to give away, giving resources — certainly in the form of money but also in the form of effort and time — is immensely beneficial for synthesizing our own happiness. The degree of increase in our own happiness is proportional in some way to the extent to which the person receiving actually needed that help and registers that help. You can serve in food kitchens, you can do community gardening, you can pick up trash, you can assist a neighbor with child care — the point is that giving resources in the form of effort and time is just as powerful as giving money.

## [01:31:55] Tool: Focus, Wandering Mind & Meditation

Another potent way to synthesize happiness is to leverage the so-called focus system — or rather, to de-emphasize the tendency of our minds to wander. There's an excellent paper on this, also published in the Journal Science, by Killingsworth and Gilbert. The title of this paper is "A Wandering Mind Is an Unhappy Mind" — published in Science in 2010.

This paper involved 2,250 adult subjects. The researchers were able to contact these subjects while they were going about living their daily lives and ask them both what they were doing and what they were feeling. They were able to assess to what extent those people were happy or unhappy or neutral at the time when they were engaging in any number of different activities. And they assessed whether or not those individuals were also focused on or focused away from whatever activity they were engaging in.

The major takeaway: regardless of whether or not people were engaging in activities that they enjoyed or not, the tendency for their mind to wander from an activity predicted lower levels of happiness than if they tended to be focused on the activity they were engaged in. Even if somebody was engaged in an activity like cleaning their house or doing homework or reading something that they weren't enjoying, if they were focused on what they were doing, they tended to report as happier than if their mind was drifting elsewhere.

And here's a remarkable finding from the paper: "although people's minds were more likely to wander to pleasant topics than to unpleasant topics" — about 43% to pleasant topics versus about 27% to unpleasant topics — "people were no happier when thinking about pleasant topics than about their current activity." The mere focus on what they were doing was more powerful than anything else, even if they didn't enjoy what they were doing.

They go on to say: "mind wandering was generally the cause, and not merely the consequence, of unhappiness." So when we are not focused on what we are doing, we tend to be far less happy than when we are focused on what we are doing. Even if what we are doing is something that we don't deem very pleasant.

This whole notion really speaks to the tremendous power of building our ability to focus on what we're doing. A practice that's known to be beneficial for increasing our ability to focus is a short meditation practice. Work from Wendy Suzuki's lab at NYU has shown that even a very brief meditation of about 13 minutes — the sort of classic type of meditation of eyes closed, focusing on one's breathing — done consistently every day can greatly enhance one's ability to focus. It was also shown to greatly enhance mood and sleep and various aspects of cognitive performance. Work from my laboratory in collaboration with Dr. David Spiegel at Stanford has shown that even briefer meditations of even just five minutes per day can have fairly outsized positive effects on a number of different parameters as well.

I prefer to view meditations of the sort I just described as perceptual or focus-based training — which is really what the data point to. Notions around consciousness and states of mind are very hard to define, but it's very clear that even a 5-minute a day or ideally up to a 13-minute a day meditation can greatly increase our ability to focus. And based on the findings in "A Wandering Mind Is an Unhappy Mind," the ability to refocus again and again on what we're doing throughout our day can have a very dramatic, statistically significant increase on our levels of overall happiness.

## [01:39:40] Tool: Quality Social Connection

What else does the research tell us we can do to increase our levels of genuine happiness? Based on the longitudinal study from Harvard, as well as the Yale happiness project and the work of numerous laboratories in the US and elsewhere, quality social connection is extremely powerful in terms of its ability to increase our levels of happiness.

What is quality social connection? Quality social connection falls into a number of different bins. This can be romantic connection, this can be friendship, this can even be coworker or just daily superficial interaction type connections. That's surprising to a lot of people, because I think a lot of people hear "quality social connection" and they think deep conversation. But it's very clear from the research that oftentimes our conversations with people that we are closest to are actually quite shallow. In fact, it's often the sharing of the trivial day-to-day things between two people or groups of people that leads to the feeling that people are really connected to one another.

## [01:41:28] Brief Social Connection, Facial Recognition & Predictability

When we hear quality social connection, I think most of us tend to think about deep, meaningful conversation or long walks on the beach or camping trips together or travel together. And while all of those certainly qualify as wonderful opportunities for social connection, opportunities for quality social connection are certainly not limited to those kinds of interactions.

I can recall times in my graduate career when I was living in the laboratory, and one of the more important social connections for me was the staff that worked there in the wee hours of the night and that came in very early in the morning. The fact that I would see them on a regular basis and maybe exchange a few words about their work or their families actually for me became very meaningful. And over the holidays when their hours were reduced, I actually missed them quite a lot. And even as I talk about this, I can recall the feelings of well-being of just seeing familiar faces.

That brings up an important point: there's quite extensive literature pointing to the fact that when we see faces, especially faces in the morning and in the late afternoon, there is a positive impact on the emotional circuitry — the circuitry of the brain that underlies emotional well-being. We as Old World primates are very dependent on faces and facial expressions in terms of registering our own place in life and our emotional state. We have a brain area called the fusiform face gyrus, discovered largely by Nancy Kanwisher at MIT, that is dedicated to the processing of faces — and not just faces in real life, but faces on computer screens and elsewhere. This area is intimately tied to areas of the brain that are associated with emotionality, with both anxiety and fear, but also areas of the brain associated with well-being.

So it comes as no surprise that when we see faces, in particular friendly faces, even if we have just brief interactions with those faces and even if no words are exchanged, that creates the sense of social bond. And it creates a sense of predictability. Daily interactions with somebody at a cafe or just a brief hello or a smile — provided that we are both present to those interactions, however brief they are — can have a positive effect on people's overall well-being, not just in that moment, but consistently.

## [01:46:33] Deep Social Connection, Presence & Eye Contact

There are basically two forms of social connection that have been studied as they relate to increasing our levels of happiness. The first one is presence and eye contact, and the second is physical contact.

In terms of presence and eye contact, there's been a lot of studies about whether or not people exchanging direct eye contact during conversation dictates whether or not each individual in that interaction feels as if they had a connection. Most people assume that a lot of eye contact, and in fact ongoing eye contact, is critical to a sense of connection. And in fact, that's not the case. There's a paper published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 2021: "Eye Contact Marks the Rise and Fall of Shared Attention in Conversation."

The basic takeaway of this study: mutual eye contact — two people registering the presence of the other person looking at them — signals the next step, which is that it's very likely that we will each both look away. And that turns out to be a way in which we set and reset attention continually during conversation. Quoting from the study: "rather than maximizing shared attention, good conversation may require shifts in and out of shared states accompanied by eye contact."

So what this basically says is that in an intimate conversation — intimate meaning both people feel present to the conversation — people will at some moment look at one another and after briefly gazing directly at one another, attention peaks, and then they will look away, and attention will get reduced. Then the conversation consists of a series of focusing back on one another with their eyes, and then focusing off, focusing on and focusing off. Those mutual eye contact moments actually predict the breaking of attention — this ramping up of attention and braking of attention, ramping up and braking. That, it turns out, is the basis of in-depth connected conversation.

So for those of you interested in creating social connection and in particular for sake of increasing happiness: seeing faces is important, ideally in person. If you want to have quality social connections, you need to be present and engage in those social connections. That requires viewing each other's faces, ideally. And eye contact — not consistent eye contact, but eye contact of the sort that builds up and then breaks and builds up and breaks across the interaction — is going to be the best way to feel that one had a real connection.

## [01:54:00] Physical Contact & Social Connection, Allogrooming, Pets

Physical contact is also important for social connection. Not just romantic or sexual type connection. In fact, there is a form of physical connection that is present in other primates and in all mammals — something called allogrooming.

The reason I'm bringing up allogrooming is that it stems from a fairly extensive literature about the prosocial, pro-happiness effects of pets on humans. There is a paper out of Yale University published in 2018: "The Influence of Interactions with Dogs on Affect, Anxiety, and Arousal in Children." The basic takeaway is that these so-called animal-assisted activities represent a really potent way to increase people's — including children's — feelings of well-being. Dogs themselves don't really have to do much except be present in the room in order for these positive effects — reductions in anxiety, increases in happiness — to occur. "Brief unstructured interactions with an unfamiliar dog, after exposure to a moderate stressor, showed higher positive affect relevant to participants who received a soothing object or waited for the same amount of time."

I myself am a good example of somebody who wasn't always able to have pets. When I was a graduate student and postdoc, I very much wanted a dog. Eventually I did own a dog, of course. But at the time I couldn't. So what I would do is every Sunday I would go to a place where they fostered dogs and they needed dog walkers. I would also walk my neighbor's dogs — I didn't charge them for it. In fact, I felt like I was being paid by getting time with those dogs.

Now, what is it about interactions with others and with other animals that can potentially have this prosocial happiness-enhancing effect? Allogrooming is a pattern of behavior observed in essentially all mammals — but very strongly in non-human primates and primates — where individuals within a species touch one another. This is non-sexual touch: someone brushing somebody else's hair or combing their hair, or someone giving someone a manicure or a pedicure, or massage for somebody in a professional context.

Allogrooming is known to stimulate a certain category of neurons called C tactile fibers — particular sensory neurons that innervate our skin. These are literally little wire endings of neurons in the skin that, when touched lightly, tend to create a feeling of well-being in the person that's being touched. Allogrooming is known to increase levels of oxytocin — a hormone/neurotransmitter known to evoke feelings of bond, of feeling bonded to somebody or something. When humans groom one another, the increases in oxytocin experienced are at least on par with and more often more dramatic in response to allogrooming than in response to other forms of touch.

When humans stroke dogs, or brush their dogs or stroke cats, that is a form of human-to-animal allogrooming. And it's one in which both the pet and the human receive huge increases in oxytocin and other related neurochemicals that make us feel bonded. This is deeply rooted in our evolutionary biology and is present both in us and in non-human primates. We can engage in these kinds of prosocial, nonverbal, non-eye-contact type behaviors through things like non-sexual tactile touch — allogrooming.

## [02:03:00] Freedom & Choice; Synthetic Happiness

I think it's also important to talk about this notion of choice and choices — whether having a lot of freedom to choose or limited freedom in choosing relates to both natural happiness and synthetic happiness. Dan Gilbert and others have explored this issue of freedom of choice and how it relates to happiness. The findings are incredibly counterintuitive, but very well supported by the data.

Dan's laboratory and other laboratories have done experiments where they give people a series of options. One of the more classic examples: they give people the opportunity to rate a number of different paintings or pictures in ascending or descending order of preference, deciding which ones they like most and which ones they like least. Then the experimenter varies the extent to which they have to stick to that choice — whether they had to make the decision and it was final, or they could change their mind later. These experiments were really about whether constraining your choice — meaning forcing somebody to make a choice and stick to that choice — led to greater or lesser levels of happiness with that choice.

What they find consistently is that when people have an ongoing set of choices, it leads to reduced levels of happiness. Now, to be clear about what this means: this is not to say that having a lot of choices leads to lesser happiness. What this set of experiments really points to is that when we make a choice, if we are forced to stick to that choice, we tend to be far happier with that choice than if we maintain the option to change our mind.

This has been exported to any number of different domains — making choices about what college to go to or what partner to select in life. In every one of those instances, we see that our happiness with our choice is very much related to that choice being either the only one or one of very few other options.

Through the lens of neuroscience we might say that the prefrontal cortex — the area of the brain involved in decision making and evaluating different options — is an area of the brain that's vital to our evolution and daily life, but it's also a fairly costly process, meaning it's very metabolically demanding. There's an entire literature related to what's called ego depletion, essentially saying that if I have you attend very intensely to a given task, and then have you switch halfway through, your ability to suppress impulsive behavior and to do a hard cognitive or physical task immediately after that is actually suppressed.

If a given choice of, say, a partner or an article of clothing might give us, in arbitrary units, X units of dopamine increase, and then we emerge from the store or the wedding focused on what we chose — and only that — there's a certain amount of neurochemical reward associated with that choice. But if we leave those choices and start thinking about the other options we might entertain, our reward circuitry becomes fractured in a way. Not physically fractured, but less attention is devoted to the reward circuitry associated with our choice. Instead of X units of dopamine, it's X divided by however many other choices we might have available in our mind or in reality.

Focusing on the choices we've made and really investing in those choices as good ones — limiting our thinking to the choices that we've made, once we've made them — is perhaps also important to our natural happiness. If we are constantly in a mode of evaluative decision-making even after we've made a decision, we are not neurochemically nor psychologically able to extract the feelings of happiness associated with the choice that we made.

## [02:11:57] Happiness Toolkit

Now let me take a step back and offer a synthesis. If we take a step back and look at the concept of happiness, we can make a couple of absolute statements. First of all, there's no single molecule or chemical associated with happiness, but that the chemical milieu of the brain and body is important for setting the stage or the opportunity for happiness. Hence, why there are treatments aimed at alleviating depression or mania that target certain neurochemical systems and hormone systems.

Happiness, at least the way I'm framing it today, has essentially two components. One is meaning — what sort of meaning do certain types of interactions or behaviors carry for us? And nested in that is this concept of connection. We talked about tools for enhancing connection: things like eye contact but not constant eye contact, being very present to a conversation or an activity you're engaging in, and the paper "A Wandering Mind Is an Unhappy Mind."

And then we talked about prosocial connection and happiness — giving money or effort, knowing how that has positively impacted others, leads to this feeling of prosocial connection and happiness in both the giver and the receiver.

Then we have what I'm referring to as performance and resources — as it relates to natural happiness. We would be wrong to say that income doesn't matter. Income that can cover costs of living plus some buffer — meaning buffer to the anxiety that circumstances might change — is important. That buffer to anxiety is going to vary depending on how anxious somebody gets about the possibility of catastrophic things happening to them, like losing their job or their rent going up. Most people recommend having, if possible, a buffer in their bank account that could cover two or three or maybe even six or twelve months of living expenses were they to lose their job.

We also need to think about performance. We would be completely inaccurate if we simply said any work leading to any outcomes, regardless of whether it gets you an A in school or an F in school, isn't going to impact your happiness. The major takeaways as they are communicated in the public sphere around the longitudinal and short-term studies of happiness tend to be more focused on social connection and how money is not important — but I don't think anyone that's saying that actually means that income that can cover your expenses plus some buffer isn't important.

So if we were to come up with a general model of happiness that includes various tools for how to increase our levels of happiness, I think it's only fair to include both natural and synthetic forms of happiness and to pursue both. Natural happiness is the kind we associate with obtaining something by effort or because it was given to us. The other form is synthetic happiness — for instance, focusing on social connection as a means to enhance happiness, or being focused on whatever activities you happen to be engaged in, regardless of whether they're positive or negative. Being present to the work you're doing in any context — physical or mental — is very likely to lead to better performance at that work.

And if an ability to focus and attend to things deeply is really what's most important — acting as the greatest lever for both natural and synthetic happiness — then tools like a 5-minute daily meditation or a 13-minute daily meditation, as well as tools that allow us to get excellent sleep every night, which sets the basis for attention during the day, are going to create an outsized effect on all the aspects, all the behaviors, that we know feed into creating natural and synthetic happiness.

So our ability to attend and focus really equates to happiness. Building your capacity to focus through a focusing exercise — which again is often called meditation but is really simply a focusing and perceptual exercise — is going to create an outsized effect on all the aspects we know feed into creating both natural and synthetic happiness.

## [02:22:00] Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Neural Network Newsletter, Social Media

Thank you for joining me for today's discussion on the science of happiness. I hope you found it informative and valuable. If you're learning from and enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel — that's a zero-cost way to support us. Also, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode — that's a great way to support this podcast.

If you'd like to receive a zero-cost monthly newsletter that summarizes podcast episodes and provides additional science-based tools and protocols not discussed on the podcast, please go to hubermanlab.com, navigate to the neural network newsletter, and enter your email. We do not share your email with anybody. And if you're not already following Huberman Lab on social media — on Instagram and Twitter it's Hubermanlab, on Facebook it's facebook.com/hubermanlab, on TikTok it's at Hubermanlab — please do consider following us there. Different content is covered on social media than what's discussed on the podcast. Thank you once again for your time and attention. And as always, thank you for your interest in science.
