---
title: "AMA #11: Improve Task Switching & Productivity and Reduce Brain Fog"
type: transcript
episode_number: 163
episode_date: 2023-09-29
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
youtube_id: 7Ey_vTTgJGc
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:00] Introduction

Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman. I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine.

Today is an Ask Me Anything episode, or AMA. This is part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which comes out every Monday and is available at zero cost to everybody on all standard feeds — YouTube, Apple, Spotify and elsewhere. We also started the premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done at Stanford and elsewhere, research on human beings that leads to important discoveries that assist mental health, physical health, and performance.

I'm also pleased to inform you that for every dollar the Huberman Lab Premium channel generates for research studies, the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match that amount. Now, we are able to double the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical health, and human performance.

If you'd like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast Premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you can pay $100 all at once to get an entire 12-month subscription for a year. We also have a lifetime subscription model that is a one-time payment. Again, you can find that option at hubermanlab.com/premium.

For those of you that are already subscribers to the premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium subscription feed. For those of you that are not Huberman Lab podcast Premium subscribers, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a premium subscriber is for you. Without further ado, let's get to answering your questions.

## [00:01:46] Is There a Way to Get Better at Task Switching?

The first question is about task switching. The specific question is, is there a way to get better at task switching? Task switching is an incredibly interesting topic. It's something that plagues many people — a lot of people have challenges with task switching. It's also a topic that people will often confuse with cognitive flexibility.

All of us, unless it's been removed, have an area of our brain called the prefrontal cortex. The words "prefrontal cortex" actually refer to a fairly varied real estate within the human brain. It's not one area of the human brain. Prefrontal cortex actually includes a lot of different subdivisions that do different things in the context of cognition and directing action, withholding action, these kinds of things. One of the main functions of the prefrontal cortex is that when it's working well, it allows us to direct our focus and our cognition — our thinking — in a context-dependent way.

One of the simplest ways to describe this is that when you took math in high school, or if you're still taking math, your brain had to carry out certain types of cognitive operations that were very different than the types of cognitive operations that you need to carry out in your history class or your social studies class. There were some features of all three of those classes that were the same — presumably you had to sit in a chair for all of them, and you followed a certain set of rules that pertained to all three, even though they were different subjects. But then, there were certain rules that pertained just to mathematics, certain rules you followed because a particular teacher was strict — not because of the topic they were covering — as well as certain rules that maybe you did not pay attention to because a different teacher was a little more lax. For instance, maybe there was a teacher that let you put your feet up on the chair in front of you; maybe another teacher forbid that at all costs.

The point being that your prefrontal cortex is the area of your brain that, along with other areas of your brain, ensures that you engage in context-specific behavior, context-specific thinking, and context-specific understanding about what you should and should not do.

Now, cognitive flexibility is similar, in the sense that it describes your ability to switch the types of cognitive operations — as the name suggests — depending on what sorts of things you're trying to learn or understand. It's a lot more extensive than that. In fact, we will probably do an entire episode all about both cognitive flexibility and perhaps even a separate episode on task switching. Task switching is somewhat distinct from cognitive flexibility. First of all, task switching requires cognitive flexibility, but they are not the same thing.

Now, when we talk about task switching — or rather, when you see task switching in the scientific literature — most often, it has to do with people performing one particular type of mental or physical operation. Say, they're maneuvering things with their hands or other parts of their body, or they are required to carry out one specific type of mental process. And then, they are required, either at random intervals or at specific intervals — maybe every 10 minutes or so — to switch their attention and to do a different task entirely.

In the laboratory experiment situation, this has most typically been carried out the following way. People are going to do one cognitive task — maybe mathematics, or they're going to count from 1 up to infinity, as high as they can go in a given amount of time, in increments of say 7, or increments of 7 plus 1 then 7 minus 1. These can be made increasingly difficult. And then perhaps a tone is played or they'll get a signal from the experimenter and they need to switch their task to doing something quite different, but also cognitive. That's the most typical arrangement.

Another typical arrangement in a task switching experiment is that the person will be asked to do some sort of physical manipulation of objects — maybe placement of puzzle pieces into the correct configuration — then at some designated interval or intervals, they will have to switch to a different manual task. Fewer — not zero, but fewer — experiments have examined task switching between physical and cognitive tasks.

There are these kind of outrageous examples that you can find on the internet. One of the most notable ones would be chess boxing. Believe it or not, this exists — where two people will enter a ring, sit down at a table, and play chess for a given period of time, entirely focused on playing chess. Then a buzzer will go off, the chess table will be cleared, the chairs will be cleared, and they will be expected to box — literally fight — for a round of a minute to three minutes, and then go back to chess, then to boxing — so-called chess boxing. I'm not suggesting people chess box. But I know that many people have challenges with task switching.

Here I can raise my hand and say that I am one such person. I've always had a pretty good ability to drop into deep focus after a period of time. I, like everybody else, take a little bit of time to get into a book chapter or to get into a mode of physical exercise. But once I'm doing something, I tend to be very focused on that. I have a much greater challenge in switching out of that focused mode to doing the next thing — which is one of the reasons why oftentimes I run tardy, because I'm still mentally thinking about or physically engaged in the thing that I was doing before. This is something I'm constantly working on. As a consequence, I've had to seek out and implement certain tools to improve my ability to task switch. I'm going to share a few of those tools with you now, because I know a number of people probably struggle with the same thing.

As I mentioned earlier, I'm also going to do a full-length episode about task switching, covering both the underlying mechanisms as well as a more extensive list of tools, as a full-length Huberman Lab podcast episode.

How can we get better at task switching? Short of having somebody scruff you by the neck and force you to stop whatever activity you're doing and engage in the next one, one of the best things that we can do — supported both at the mechanistic level and at the practical level within the published literature — is to introduce short transition gaps between the activities that we're trying to switch between. This is something that, in my opinion, has not been discussed enough. In fact, when was the last time you heard about the requirement for introducing gaps between tasks if you want to switch between them more efficiently?

And yet, as a consequence of this not being discussed very often, I think a lot of people have placed an undue burden on themselves. For instance, a lot of people think that when you sit down with a book and you're going to read, you should be able to immediately focus on the material you're reading and not have your mind flitting about. During the first five, maybe even 10 minutes of reading a book chapter — unless you are absolutely enthralled from the first word, or you are intensely curious about what the material is — it's going to be about five or 10 minutes before the neural circuits in your brain that are required to understand and digest and commit that material to memory are going to come online at the levels of activity required for you to experience that as intense focus, or even as mild focus.

The activity of the brain is always going to be in a push-pull. This is extremely important for understanding task switching. When you go from one task — and maybe the task was simply to walk over to where the book is located — to focusing on the material within that book, you have to both engage activity within certain neural circuits and you need to disengage the activity of other neural circuits. Sometimes this is referred to as inhibition of certain neural circuits. Other times, it's just going to be a dissipation of activity of those neural circuits — they're just going to quiet down, like a dimming of the lights in a particular room, while the activity of other neural circuits increases.

The first thing that you really need to understand, if you want to get better at task switching, is that you cannot and you should not expect yourself to immediately drop into a narrow trench of focus, or a narrow trench of ability, for anything that you're not already extremely skilled at or extremely interested in knowing.

One of the reasons why this is often overlooked is that if we receive a text message from somebody and we are very interested in what's contained in that text message — maybe even eagerly anticipating the dot dot dot in that little window where the message is going to arrive — that's an example of where you are able to immediately pay attention and absorb information. If you're trying to meet somebody in a big city and you need to know exactly where to meet them, and you've arrived at the place where you thought you needed to be and you can't find them — you're going to commit that information to memory and act on it immediately. But when you sit down to read a book of unknown content, or where you have just a general sense of what the content is, or when you sit down to do something like work on a spreadsheet or your taxes, or engage in a conversation with somebody — expect a five to 10 minute transition period.

I can't emphasize this enough, because I think a lot of people mistakenly think that they have issues with attention. Perhaps they do have clinically diagnosable attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or some other form of attention deficit disorder — I certainly can't rule that out based on this conversation alone. But a lot of people place this unfair burden on themselves to immediately be able to focus on a given task.

This is also true for physical tasks. If you go to the gym to work out or you're heading out on a run or a cycling expedition, the idea that you would immediately be able to cycle at your peak performance, or that you could perform sets and reps in the gym as best as you possibly could without any warm-up, without any transition period — that you could forget about the difficult or maybe even great conversation that you were having on the way in — that's just completely unfair. It doesn't match at all the way that your neural circuits work. You really need to match your expectation of your ability to focus on and perform a given task, whether it's cognitive or physical, to the actual underlying biology. That's the first point.

The second point is that we know if you want to switch from one task to another, you are making it more difficult to drop into full engagement with task B following task A if you try and go immediately from A to B. Even the introduction — and I find this so cool — even the introduction of an arbitrary but very short transition period of say 15 seconds, where you know that you're introducing 15 seconds of transition and you designate it as transition, will allow you to engage in a more efficient and more complete level of task execution on task B. This I find fascinating, because what this means is that there are top-down influences — there are literally things that we can tell ourselves, based on an understanding of the underlying mechanisms, that allow us to task switch better. This certainly doesn't involve taking any kind of prescription drug or supplement or doing anything differently, except designating a transition period as you go from task A to task B.

I'm not trying to focus on the next thing that I need to do. I might focus on it inadvertently, but I'm not deliberately trying to focus on it. Rather, I'm going to think about what I just did and the fact that I'm no longer doing that — kind of leaving it like a fog behind. You're trying to move from this deep trench of attention on task A, and you're now done with task A. You're not placing this unfair expectation on your neural circuits to just flip to task B. You're also acknowledging that task B is going to take five to 10 minutes to drop into fully. But you're going to shorten that five to 10 minutes by deliberately introducing a transition period.

What comes in that transition period and its duration is important. First, let's deal with the duration. How long should the transition period be? That is going to scale directly with how long you were in a deep trench of focus for task A.

Let's assume task A was something kind of light for you — maybe you're just handling some email, talking to a coworker, or you were at a board meeting and it was kind of light. This is stuff that you do all the time. Now, you're headed back to your desk or to your next class. In that case, the transition period can be fairly short — just a couple of minutes.

On the other hand, if you were in a deep trench of attention, really engaged in that first task, I suggest giving yourself a couple of minutes or more — maybe as much as five to 10 minutes. But you might not have that much time, in which case, give yourself any kind of transition, even if it's 10 seconds. I certainly have had times in my life — in particular when I was a new assistant professor before I got tenure — where I remember sitting down to work on a grant, getting two lines out, and someone would knock on the door. And then I'd have to shift my attention and go back to writing. The point being: if you are deeply engaged in an activity, give yourself a little bit longer in the transition period. If you are sort of superficially involved in an activity, you need less of a transition period. But you need a transition period.

What should come during that transition period? The most important thing is a relative lack of attention to anything new. This is what's so destructive about the phone. Keep in mind, I am not one of these people that thinks smartphones are terrible — in fact, I use mine very often, all day. Not necessarily during deep cognitive focus, but in between those bouts of focus. I have to text message people, I do work on there, I'm on social media. So certainly not demonizing the smartphone.

However, if you finish a given activity — whether cognitive or physical — and you are headed to something else that requires significant amounts of attention and focus, then you would do very well to allow yourself a period of anywhere from two minutes to maybe as long as 10 minutes where you are not looking at your phone. You're not texting. You're not on social media. You're not foraging for anything. In fact, you're trying to limit the total amount of information that you're bringing into your nervous system.

Now, you don't have to walk around with your eyes closed trying not to hear or see anything. Let's be practical — that's impossible to do anyway. You can't shut down your brain while awake. But by introducing these transition periods of two to 10 minutes between different tasks, and making sure that within those transition periods you are not bringing in new information, you're ensuring that you're not going from task A to task B to task C. What we're talking about here is trying to limit your task switching between task A and task B and not introducing another task in between.

You might think that looking at your phone is not a task — it's so easy, so reflexive. But it is. It's bringing in a lot of new context — in particular pictures and movies, which are tremendous stimulus for the nervous system and anchor your attention. It's bringing in new ideas and new thoughts that no matter how hard you try, are going to intrude into your ability to perform task B. When people say, "how do I get better at task switching," I immediately want to say — please don't introduce yet more tasks. Switching from one task to another is hard enough already. Don't introduce another task in between.

Some of you might take this to mean that you shouldn't have a conversation with a coworker after a meeting while walking down the hall. I'm not saying that — I still encourage people to be social and to engage in workplace environments. However, after many years of working in laboratories that at times were quite large, one of the things that you learn how to do if you're going to get good at your craft is to not pay attention to what's going on with everyone crowded around a computer looking at who's winning the World Cup. One has to scruff themselves a little bit in trying to limit their attention to a number of different things in the environment, and really go from task A to task B in a really dedicated way.

Short lists benefit certain people. I know a lot of people are list makers out there — they like to put two or three things, or maybe 20 things, that they're going to accomplish each day. One of the best tools that I ever learned, both for the sake of task switching but also for just getting things done on a consistent basis — I picked this up while I was a master's student at Berkeley — a very accomplished professor at that time told me that he writes down every day three things that he's going to accomplish, and only three things, never more than three. He also included other activities — he was quite active physically; he rode his bike to campus, was a runner, and also went to the gym — but he did not include those on his list of three things. He would write down no more than three critical things to do each day.

I've employed that method as well. I'll write down one, sometimes two, most often three — but if I can, just one or two tasks that I need to complete each day. Everything else is considered part of the automaticity function of my day — things that I already know how to do and don't require a ton of cognitive focus. I limit the things that require a lot of cognitive focus to three things per day. However, those three things per day can take up many, many hours, certainly on the whole.

There are additional things that one can do to improve your ability to task switch. One of the things that I found particularly beneficial is not a meditation, but rather a perceptual exercise. This is a perceptual exercise that I learned about when I was a graduate student, but in a totally different context. It has to do with the way that your visual system and the parts of your brain that parse time are related to one another and influence one another.

The reason this tool makes sense for improving your ability to task switch is because it turns out that where you focus your visual attention strongly influences the way that your brain parses time. I'll describe the tool first, and then get a little bit into the underlying mechanisms. Again, I'll get deep into the underlying mechanisms, as well as the tool and additional tools, in a future full-length episode about task switching.

If you were to close your eyes and not look at anything in your external environment and just concentrate — for instance, on your breathing or the feeling on the surface of your skin — I know this is starting to sound like meditation, but trust me, it's not — your perception of time, that is, how finely you are slicing time, would be distinctly different than if you were to open your eyes and focus on a faraway location, say way off on the horizon, and not focus on your bodily sensations. Similarly, if you were to focus your attention on some intermediate location, maybe 20 feet away, and simultaneously focus on your internal bodily sensations, your perception of time — how quickly time was passing — would also be different.

The perceptual tool for task switching is a very simple one. It's one that I do every morning and have for many years now, and at least for me, has really enhanced my ability to task switch. Just take a couple of minutes — this really only takes about two or three minutes. Typically, I'll start by closing my eyes. I should mention, I typically do this in an environment where ideally I can see off into the distance — perhaps from a balcony if I'm in an apartment or a house, ideally outdoors. But if I'm indoors, I'll still do this and just look as far off into the distance as I can when that step is required.

I start off by closing my eyes and essentially not looking at anything, but directing my brain's focus to either the surface of my body — just what it feels like, what it's in contact with or not in contact with — or maybe my breathing. Then, I'll open my eyes and focus on some location on my bodily surface, like my hand at some distance. I'll focus my attention there for about five to 15 seconds. I don't count specifically, just roughly five to 15 seconds. Then, I'll typically lower my hand and look off into the distance — maybe five to 10 feet — and focus my visual attention there. Try and hold that focus for five to 15 seconds. Then, I'll look further off into the distance, and ultimately, look at a location as far off into the distance as I possibly can. I'm also trying to pay attention to my breathing at the same time, just as a way of calibrating my location. Then, I'll close my eyes and return my attention to my immediate environment.

The entire thing only takes about two minutes. Starting with eyes closed, focusing on self for five to 15 seconds. Then, eyes open, focusing on the surface of one's body, that is, focusing one's visual attention on one's hand — five to 15 seconds. Then maybe 10 feet away, then maybe 50 feet away, then off to the horizon, and then back to one's immediate location by closing one's eyes. The distances don't have to be precise.

What is happening when one does this perceptual exercise? You are shifting your visual focus, obviously. But you're also shifting the way in which you fine-slice or thick-slice time. Your ability to consciously recognize whether you are thin-slicing or thick-slicing time is much harder to grasp than it is to notice whether you're looking at your hand or off in the distance — that's kind of obvious. But what we know for sure is that as you shift your attention from your immediate environment out to different designated locations, and your time perception shifts accordingly, you're essentially training your brain to shift visual focus and the way in which you process in the time domain.

This is important in the context of task switching, because so much of task switching is not just understanding "OK, I'm going from reading to running" and knowing the different types of operations required in each case, but also shifting the neural circuits that underlie your perception of time. So much of our ability to execute a task with high proficiency has to do with getting our thinking and our actions into the correct time domain.

When I say time domain, I know a number of people can get confused. Just think of it this way. When you see a slow motion movie, what you're seeing is a movie that was shot at a high frame rate — many frames per second. The typical smartphone shoots movies at about 60 frames per second; some older ones, 30 frames per second. The slow-mo function on your smartphone is actually a high frame rate function — you took the same movie but at a higher frame rate, so you've got a lot more images and can generate slow motion. With your visual system, when you focus very close in to your body or are focused on bodily sensations in your immediate environment, you are fine-slicing in the time domain more so than when you are looking further off in the distance.

Similarly, when you engage in one type of task — like a board meeting or a Zoom meeting or a conversation with friends — you are in a very different set of neural circuit functions than when you sit down to read or learn math or lift weights or go to therapy or go for a walk with your dog.

Now, it should be clear why, when you move from task to task, you want to: A, introduce a transition period — even if it's very brief, maybe you don't even have time for the two minute transition period and you just say "OK, I'm in a transition period between task A and task B, I just need like 10 seconds, I'm going to count down 10 to one, this is transition time, this is not a time to look at my phone or to be in lots of different time domains."

In addition to that, I recommend having some practice. I described the practice that I've used for some period of time now — at least for me, to great success — where you are deliberately shifting your visual attention between different locations close to you and far away, as a perceptual practice. Again, the whole thing only takes about two minutes, maybe three minutes. You don't even need to do it every day. I happen to do it every day, but I miss the occasional day here and there. Even if you were to do this perceptual practice once a week or three times a week, I'm certain that you'll benefit. Because in doing that perceptual practice, there's also an immediate recognition of the sorts of shifts that your brain is required to engage in any time you move from task A to task B or from task B to task C. You start to see and feel — literally see and feel — the way that transition occurs.

You can accelerate that transition if you understand that when I'm looking here and engaging in this type of behavior or set of tasks, and then I'm now going to be expected to do another task in a completely different type of environment, the brain is going to be required to shift over the neural circuits that are active and less active in order to do that. You can accelerate that process by practicing it using that perceptual tool.

There, I covered some specific tools that one can use to enhance one's ability to task switch, touching on a bit of the underlying neurobiology and why transition periods are useful, if not required. If you think about it — there's always a transition period when task switching, but here, you're taking conscious control over that transition period.

There are additional tools for enhancing one's ability to task switch. They tend to be somewhat specific for the certain kinds of cognitive or physical tasks that one needs to do. The example of chess boxing that I gave earlier is a great example of task switching at its extreme. The space-time bridging practice — very safe; I can't think of any way in which it might be dangerous, although please don't do it while driving or operating any other machinery. By all accounts, very safe, zero cost. We talked about some of the other tools for task switching as well.

## [00:32:17] Huberman Lab Premium

Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions — plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else — please go to hubermanlab.com/premium.

Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast Premium channel, it's really twofold. First, it's to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which will still be released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast. And second, it's to fund research — in particular, research done on human beings. Not animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree is the species that we are most interested in. We are going to specifically fund research aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. Those protocols will be distributed through all channels — not just the premium channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels.

The idea here is to give you information to your burning questions, in depth, and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place.

An especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium channel. This is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel, to further support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance.

If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab Premium channel, again there's a cost of $10 per month, or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs — you can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll of course get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content, such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab Podcast episodes not found elsewhere. Again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. As always, thank you for your interest in science.
