---
title: "Benefits & Risks of Peptide Therapeutics for Physical & Mental Health"
type: transcript
episode_date: "2024-04-01"
episode_number: 195
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
youtube_id: zU5EYw06wtw
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:00] Peptides

Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing peptides.

Peptides are a topic that's receiving a lot of attention these days, in part because of the excitement about the so-called GLP-1 analogues or agonists. GLP-1 stands for glucagon-like peptides — these are drugs used to treat type 2 diabetes as well as drugs used to treat obesity. Today we are not going to discuss the GLP-1 analogues; however, we are going to discuss some of the other peptides that are receiving a lot of attention these days, including peptides for tissue healing and repair as well as peptides that impact longevity and vitality.

In principle, any discussion about peptides could be enormously vast and that's because there are so many different kinds of peptides. For instance, insulin — which is involved in regulating our blood sugar or blood glucose levels — is a peptide. Oxytocin, which is sometimes called the love hormone, although that's not the best description of what oxytocin does, is a neuropeptide hormone involved in everything from pair bonding to socialization, and a bunch of other things as well. Those are just two examples of peptides familiar to most people by name, and they exist within the tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands of different peptides that exist within our brain and body.

Today's discussion is going to focus on peptides that are increasingly being used for therapeutic purposes. This is a topic area for which there is a lot of confusion. The mere naming of the peptides is confusing — often times they're referred to simply by virtue of acronyms and numbers like BPC-157 or MK-677, such that if you're not really familiar with them it can be a bit overwhelming. Today I'm going to provide a very simple organizational framework that will allow you to understand what these different therapeutic peptides are, why certain ones may be advantageous for certain purposes, highlighting the potential risks and in some cases outright dangers, and I'll tell you how they each work alone and in combination toward achieving specific physical and in some cases even mental health goals.

A lot of what's happening with applied therapeutic peptide biology falls into one of three categories. There are peptides that are being prescribed by physicians — these are FDA-approved prescription peptides for specific purposes. There are other peptides that reside in kind of a gray market area — you can purchase them online, but the safety and efficacy of those peptides is a bit questionable, in some cases very questionable, and I'll give you some filters to determine which category certain peptides fall into. And then of course there are the black market peptides. It is possible to buy peptides online through any number of different sources, and I do not suggest people purchase black market peptides. It's very clear that a lot of them are contaminated with things that, both in the short term but especially in the long term, can be problematic. So if you're interested in understanding or using therapeutic peptides, today's episode is for you.

## [00:07:44] What is a Peptide?, Effects

A peptide is a small protein that's made up of little chains of amino acids. The moment people hear "protein" they usually think proteins that you eat, or perhaps four calories per gram of protein. Keep in mind that we have lots of different kinds of proteins within our body that have nothing to do with the proteins that we eat. Many of the amino acids that comprise peptides as well as other proteins in the body come from the foods that we eat, because the amino acids are the building blocks of peptides and other proteins.

The basic way that we define a peptide is that it tends to be a small protein — meaning chains of anywhere from 2 to 50 amino acids, that's really the strict definition — however, peptides that are a little bit bigger, so maybe 75 or 100 amino acids in length, will also often be considered a peptide. If you start combining different peptides together, you get what's called polypeptides, and many of the proteins in the body are polypeptides. So a peptide basically looks like beads on a string, where there are 2 to 100 beads and each of those beads represents a different amino acid. The arrangement of each amino acid relative to one another — their order along that string — determines what the peptide is and what the peptide does.

The other important thing to understand about peptides is that some peptides are hormones, other peptides are merely called peptide proteins, others are neuromodulators meaning they adjust the activity of neurons, and some peptides multitask and do many things. In fact, most peptides have what are called pleiotropic effects, meaning they affect many different aspects of cells. This is very important to understand because, unlike discussions about dopamine or specific hormones like testosterone or estrogen, when we talk about therapeutic peptides we're often talking about a single peptide that does a bunch of different things depending on the cell type, the time of day or night that the peptide is present, and the different downstream effects.

When a peptide binds to a receptor on a cell surface — think of that as a little parking spot on the surface of a cell — it sets in motion a kind of bucket brigade, a conveyor belt of cellular processes: activating one pathway for cellular growth, another pathway for cell migration, maybe another pathway to stimulate the growth of blood vessels. Lots of different pleiotropic effects. This is important because when we're talking about peptide therapeutics, rarely if ever are we talking about a very targeted and very specific effect. This matters in terms of potential side effects, how to adjust dosage, how long to take a peptide, and whether or not to cycle it.

So rarely if ever will you hear that a peptide does one thing. Most often a peptide does anywhere from four to maybe even a thousand different things. Take oxytocin — it's known to be involved in milk letdown during lactation, pair bonding in both males and females, bonding between parent and child, maybe even parent and pet. The point is that if you want a specific biological effect — maybe you want to repair a given injury, or you'd like to get more growth hormone to get leaner or recover from exercise more quickly — yes, there are peptides that can impact those pathways. But always, if you take therapeutic peptides designed to promote activity within a given pathway for a specific purpose, you are going to activate other pathways as well. There's simply no way to remove the pleiotropic feature of peptide therapeutics.

## [00:12:06] Peptide Sourcing, Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)

There are really three different paths by which people obtain peptides. The first is by prescription from a board-certified medical doctor. Some peptides have been approved for one use but can be prescribed for off-label use — these are FDA-approved, clinically tested peptides. For instance, the peptide sermorelin, which promotes the release of growth hormone, has been FDA approved for the treatment of short stature but is often now prescribed for other things as well.

Regardless of the specific use in mind, it's absolutely clear that the safest and best situation — if one is going to use therapeutic peptides — is to use prescription therapeutic peptides where the prescription comes from a board-certified physician. The reason is that sometimes these peptides come from pharmaceutical companies, other times they are made by a compounding pharmacy, but in both situations they are cleaned of what's called lipopolysaccharide, or LPS. LPS is something that can accumulate in the manufacturing process of some of these peptides, and it's something you really want to remove from the peptide before you ingest it or inject it. Most peptides are injected either subcutaneously or into the muscle, although some can be taken orally or even as a topical cream.

LPS causes an immune response, and while a tiny amount of LPS might not cause a massive immune response, the accumulation of many LPS exposures can start to become problematic. Gray market and black market sources often do contain the same peptide one would get from a prescription, but very often they haven't cleaned out the lipopolysaccharide, and that can start to create problems over time. In the case of black market sources especially, often times the peptides are not what they claim to be on the label — that's especially problematic.

So if you are going to explore peptide therapeutics, I highly highly recommend — indeed I implore you — to do so with a board-certified physician and to acquire peptides through a reliable source where the LPS has been removed, which typically means from a pharmaceutical company or from a compounding pharmacy.

## [00:14:48] Rejuvenation & Tissue Repair: BPC-157, Angiogenesis

Today we're going to cover four general areas in which peptide therapeutics can be useful. The first is for rejuvenation and repair of basically any tissue, but in particular muscle and connective tissue — sports type injuries but also things like gut, for people that suffer from IBS, irritable bowel syndrome, colitis, or other gut issues. Then we're going to discuss therapeutic peptides for metabolism and growth of frankly all tissues — most people think of fat loss and muscle growth, and indeed those fall under this category. Then we'll discuss therapeutic peptides specifically for longevity, both staving off tumor growth as well as potentially increasing lifespan, although this is a very experimental area at present. And then we'll talk about therapeutic peptides for increasing vitality — both mood and libido in both men and women.

It's pretty common to injure a given tissue — strain a tendon, tear a ligament, break a bone, or any number of different things. To understand why a peptide found within the gut would be involved in tissue healing and repair, you need to understand that the lining of your gut involves a bunch of different layers of cells that turn over at a pretty frequent rate. Unlike your brain cells, where after about age 25 you're not adding or deleting many neurons, your gut is very different — within the milieu of the gut you have a lot of turnover of cells. Cell turnover is in many ways the same sort of process involved in wound healing and repair. If you cut your skin, at some point it will heal — first there'll be a scab, then that scab will give way as the tissue underneath it mends. So the fact that there is a peptide in our gut that can be involved in tissue turnover — and tissue turnover is equivalent to tissue repair — is not all that surprising.

Anytime we're discussing tissue rejuvenation — cellular turnover or tissue repair — it almost certainly is going to involve angiogenesis, which is the development of new vascular supply or blood supply. When we're talking about angiogenesis in the context of tissue rejuvenation and repair, we're talking about the addition of new capillaries and blood vessels, which means the addition of new endothelial cells — the cells that make up the walls of those blood vessels. Put simply: if you want to rejuvenate or repair a tissue, you need additional blood supply.

One of the clear effects of BPC-157 is to encourage cellular turnover as well as cellular migration, so new cells moving into a given area, as well as new blood supply through the promotion of angiogenesis. BPC-157 has been shown in animal studies — and I really want to emphasize animal studies, because that's where the vast, vast majority of data on BPC-157 comes from — to increase blood flow to a given area by virtue of increased angiogenesis. It promotes the development of new blood vessels to the entire injury site. It does this by recognizing injured blood vessels and injured capillaries and then promoting the activity of a given enzyme called eNOS, or endothelial nitric oxide synthase, which then causes more blood vasculature to form at the injury site and around the injury site. That in turn allows for the delivery not just of blood but for the growth factors contained within blood that then promote the further rejuvenation of different cell types — things that could potentially lead to repair of muscle, ligament, tendon, and so forth. BPC-157 is also known to further encourage the growth of capillaries and veins within the injury area, so it both calls in the development of new vasculature and promotes the growth of that new vasculature.

## [00:21:50] BPC-157 & Tissue Injury; Mode of Delivery

BPC-157 has been shown from animal studies to encourage fibroblast migration and growth within a site of injury. Fibroblasts are a key cell type within an injury — they provide some of the firm, strong substrate for bridging injuries and allow different things like tendons and ligaments to restore themselves from a torn or partially torn state to a complete tendon or ligament.

There's a very long and interesting history of the use of gastric juices to promote tissue healing and repair. In the historical medical literature there are instances of people severing off a finger or even a hand, and then a surgeon placing it inside the gut as a way to preserve that finger or hand — keeping it alive essentially — and then making an attempt to graft it back on. While not always successful, it became clear that tissues placed inside the milieu of the gut stood a better chance of being grafted back on. Physicians became intrigued by the idea that maybe something within the gut itself, and in particular within gastric juices, was beneficial for preserving and maybe even rejuvenating tissues. One particular peptide compound turned out to be BPC — Body Protection Compound — which is synthesized as BPC-157.

If one has an injury to the arm, leg, ankle, or Achilles tendon, how does the body protection compound that normally exists within the gut actually access that injured tissue? This still remains somewhat of a mystery. It is clear that BPC-157 can exit the gut, but how it gets trafficked to particular sites within the body that are injured still isn't clear.

Within the community of people that use BPC-157 for therapeutic reasons, there's been an ongoing debate as to whether or not you can take it systemically — inject it or take it orally — and it will find and direct itself to the site of injury, or whether it's more beneficial to inject it directly to the site of injury. Here there's really no formal science. When we talk about BPC-157, we can look to a pretty large literature of peer-reviewed studies dating back to about 1993, with quality studies in animal models such as rats and mice, and a dearth of formal rigorous exploration in humans. At the same time, there's a rich set of anecdotal data — many, many people who take BPC-157 report positive effects.

The typical route of taking BPC-157 is either to inject it subcutaneously or into the muscle — subcutaneously just a few inches off the belly button, or into the shoulder if doing it intramuscularly — regardless of where the injury is. In some cases people will direct it to the site of injury by injecting more locally, like if you have an elbow injury, putting it into or subcutaneously near the elbow.

The anecdotal data seem to indicate that the mode of delivery — whether systemic or local — doesn't seem to matter that much, although some people will purport that local injections serve recovery of the tissue more readily than systemic injections. We don't know if we're dealing with robust placebo effects or real effects, given the lack of human clinical studies.

## [00:27:53] BPC-157: Safety, Doses, Cycling, Tumor Risk

One of the reasons BPC-157 is being used so extensively is that it does seem to have very high safety profiles with respect to lethal dosing. The LD50 of BPC-157 is incredibly high — as high as 2 grams, that is 2,000 milligrams per kilogram of body weight. However — please hear me on this — that does not mean that anyone should be taking high dosages of BPC-157. The typical therapeutic doses that are prescribed are anywhere from 300 to 500 micrograms subcutaneously, maybe two or three times per week, typically done for a course of about eight weeks, and then people typically cycle off for anywhere from 8 to 10 weeks.

There are individuals that take BPC-157 consistently every day without any break. I think that is a bad idea. I am not suggesting anyone run out and take BPC-157 — today's episode is really about giving you information so you can make the determination of whether or not you even want to take it.

One reason to avoid BPC-157 relates to something that many people take it for because they believe it's good for them, and that's its small but nonetheless meaningful impact on upregulating growth hormone receptors. This can be a good thing if you're trying to upregulate growth hormone receptors at a given injury site so that growth hormone — which comes from the pituitary — can have a heightened level of action at that tissue. However, for some people — perhaps people who have a tumor in a given area — an increase in growth hormone receptors in and around the tumor could potentially increase the growth of that tumor.

That's one of the major issues with BPC-157 that's not often discussed: if you have a tumor, and tumors thrive on increased blood flow because they like to consume growth factors, then by taking BPC-157 you may be maintaining or accelerating the growth of a tumor that would otherwise remain small. BPC-157 is a potential tumor growth risk.

One way BPC-157 creates this increase in angiogenesis is through upregulation of something called VEGF — vascular endothelial growth factor. There is a common treatment for cancers called bevacizumab, which is a VEGF inhibitor designed to fight tumors by reducing their blood supply, whereas BPC-157 is doing the exact opposite — increasing levels of VEGF to increase angiogenesis. So if you're concerned about tumors or cancer of any kind, BPC-157 is probably not something you want to explore.

So if BPC-157 carries these risks, why are so many people interested in taking it? In large part that's due to the fact that the anecdotal data about BPC-157 is just so strong. People report recovering from shoulder injuries much faster; there are claims about people recovering from complete tissue transections. The animal data are pretty impressive — studies in rats involving complete transection, not just a partial tear, of a given ligament, tendon, or nerve pathway show that when BPC-157 is applied systemically it seems able to travel to the site of injury and it does seem that on average these tissues repair faster than they do if BPC-157 is not provided. But the tumor concerns and the lack of human data are a real concern that everyone should be made aware of.

If you're going to go down the path of taking BPC-157, I would encourage you to take the minimal effective dose, to not do it every day, certainly not to do it continuously, and to monitor your other health metrics for anything that could potentially resemble cancer or tumor growth.

## [00:36:43] Tissue Repair: Thymosin Beta-4, TB-500

There's another peptide getting increasing attention for tissue rejuvenation and repair: thymosin beta-4, and a related peptide called TB-500, which is basically a truncated or shortened version of the thymosin beta-4 peptide.

The thymus is present in children and then disappears as we get older. It's well known — this is correlative — that children recover more quickly from injuries and that the degree of tissue regrowth and repair of wounds with minimal scarring is so much greater in young children than in adults. This gave rise to the idea that perhaps some of the peptides secreted from the thymus, such as thymosin beta-4, could be involved in tissue rejuvenation and repair. That's what led to the laboratory synthesis of thymosin beta-4 — the full-length peptide made in a lab, not by the thymus — and adults take it. Or they take TB-500, which is this truncated, slightly shortened version of thymosin beta-4, which acts similarly but has a different mode of action and lasts a little bit longer.

Again, we're in a situation where there are vast amounts of animal data — studies in mice and rats — showing that thymosin beta-4 can increase the rate and/or thoroughness of wound healing and repair, but there are more and more people now taking it and reporting positive effects. At the level of mechanism, the difference between BPC-157 and thymosin beta-4 is that thymosin beta-4 really promotes the growth and infiltration of all sorts of different cell types associated with tissue rejuvenation and wound healing. It's been shown to promote stem cell proliferation and to increase the growth of the so-called extracellular matrix — the stuff around the cells that keeps the tissue or organ rigid and stable. The idea is that thymosin beta-4 is promoting the aggregation of a bunch of things associated with tissue healing.

I've noticed that a lot of people talk about TB-500 in the context of being growth-promoting. As far as I know, it isn't growth-promoting — it doesn't impact the growth hormone pathway or other pathways associated with tissue growth; rather, it's involved in tissue repair.

The two major players for tissue rejuvenation and repair: BPC-157, which you can frame up in your mind as promoting angiogenesis and wound repair mainly through the addition of new vasculature to the wound site, and then thymosin beta-4, sometimes referred to as TB-500, which is a shorter synthesized version of a molecule known to come from the thymus in children. At least anecdotally, people taking TB-500 alone or in combination with BPC-157 report more thorough or more rapid tissue rejuvenation and repair.

## [00:40:49] Growth & Metabolism: Growth Hormone, IGF-1, Risks

The next category of peptide effects are the effects of certain peptides on metabolism and growth. Any discussion about metabolism and growth by definition has to include growth hormone.

Growth hormone is a hormone that we naturally make, secreted from a gland called the pituitary gland. The pituitary sits near the roof of the mouth and extends out of the stalk of the brain, releasing hormones into the general bloodstream. The pituitary is connected to the brain — it gets input from a brain area called the hypothalamus. Within the hypothalamus there are neurons that can send signals to the pituitary telling it to either release growth hormone or to suppress the release of growth hormone.

Early in life — when we are infants, children, and teenagers — we secrete tons of growth hormone, in particular during the early hours of sleep each night. We also secrete growth hormone a little bit throughout the day, but it's really during sleep that we have the greatest degree of growth hormone release. This is one reason why babies and kids and teenagers sleep so much — there is a lot of growth hormone release during sleep. After about age 30, the amount of growth hormone released each night is reduced by about 15% for every decade of life. As a consequence, all the things that growth hormone does — higher metabolism, fat loss, the growth of muscle tissue — are dramatically reduced as we go from 30 to 40 to 50 and beyond. Naturally released growth hormone also tends to have positive effects on mood and overall feelings of well-being. Growth hormone potently increases ATP production, involved in energy and metabolism in our cells, and as a consequence our overall feelings of energy to do things, mental or physical.

There's another hormone called IGF-1, or insulin-like growth factor 1, which is produced by the liver. IGF-1 does many things similar to growth hormone and is actually released in response to growth hormone. The pathway works like this: a signal called growth hormone releasing hormone comes from the hypothalamus and stimulates the anterior pituitary to release growth hormone. Growth hormone is then circulated throughout the blood — it increases ATP production for energy, causes tissue repair in some cases, and encourages growth of tissues not just muscles but other tissues as well, which is why it's involved in helping us achieve our full height. When growth hormone reaches the liver, it stimulates the release of IGF-1, which in turn does things that are both synergistic with growth hormone and different — in particular things related to regulation of blood sugar, metabolism, and things associated with youthfulness, vitality, and energy.

You can see why some people might be interested in augmenting or increasing levels of growth hormone. Growth hormone has been sequenced and synthesized, so you can buy a synthetic version — some people take prescription growth hormone by subcutaneous injection at night. However, keep in mind that growth hormone is indiscriminate with respect to which tissues it grows. If you happen to have an existing tumor, it will encourage growth of that tumor as well. Another concern is that it is subject to negative feedback: if your blood levels of growth hormone are too high by virtue of injecting growth hormone, the pituitary can register that and shut down endogenous growth hormone production.

## [00:45:25] Secretagogues, Sermorelin, Tesamorelin, CJC-1295

Because of these concerns, people have developed peptide therapeutics that stimulate the release of growth hormone — and thereby IGF-1 — but not by directly injecting growth hormone. These peptides mimic the sorts of things that are typically released from the hypothalamus onto the pituitary and in that way stimulate the release of growth hormone. These are typically called secretagogues — peptide molecules synthesized in a laboratory that stimulate the release of growth hormone and thereby stimulate the production of IGF-1.

There are two general categories. Rather than use the confusing standard nomenclature — which involves a lot of errors even in the scientific literature — I'm going to call these Category 1 peptides and Category 2 peptides.

Category 1 peptides are generally the ones most thoroughly tested in humans; in several cases they are FDA approved for certain conditions. The first and most widely discussed is sermorelin. Sermorelin is a synthetic compound designed to mimic naturally occurring growth hormone releasing hormone, and it is FDA approved for the treatment of short stature. Sermorelin has been shown to mimic what is normally released from the hypothalamus and stimulates the pituitary to release growth hormone, causing increases in circulating growth hormone and IGF-1. The typical dosages of sermorelin are anywhere from 200 to 400 micrograms, typically taken at night before sleep, anywhere from three to five times per week. Taking it continuously 7 days per week for long periods of time can cause some desensitization. I'll be completely forthcoming — I've taken sermorelin on and off for the last couple of years, typically one to two nights per week. I stopped taking it because I noticed it made the sleep in the early part of my night very deep and robust, but then I would wake up, or at least according to my sleep trackers, I wasn't getting nearly as much rapid eye movement sleep as I normally would. It seemed to replace rapid eye movement sleep with more deep sleep. REM sleep is critical for things that deep sleep can't achieve and vice versa, so you really want both. That effect on increasing deep non-REM sleep is something that's pretty well documented.

The second Category 1 growth hormone promoting peptide is tesamorelin, which goes by the brand name Egrifta. It's an FDA-approved drug for the reduction of visceral adiposity in HIV patients. It also seems to produce some of the same effects as sermorelin. The differences between the two relate to small differences in the amino acid sequence. Tesamorelin is a bit more long-lasting than sermorelin and therefore is taken typically about three times per week, not five.

The third most commonly used peptide in this Category 1 is CJC-1295. CJC-1295 is basically a variant of a different growth hormone secreting peptide to which they add what's called a DAC — a drug affinity complex — a sequence that makes it very long-lasting. CJC-1295 is typically taken only twice per week or even once per week because its effects last several days. However, CJC-1295 has entered clinical trials and there was a death within one of the clinical trials that was related to cardiovascular dysfunction. It's known to cause some fluid retention and increased fluid volume, which may have been related to that cardiovascular death. Given that there are decent alternatives in sermorelin and tesamorelin, I don't know why anyone would specifically select CJC-1295 until all these safety issues have been resolved.

## [00:53:44] Ipamorelin, Hexarelin, GHRP-3, MK-677; Risks & Timing

Category 2 growth hormone promoting peptides operate differently. These peptides encourage the release of growth hormone by mimicking or stimulating the release of another peptide called ghrelin. Some of you may be familiar with ghrelin because it's a peptide that increases in concentration when we are hungry — it stimulates hunger and also stimulates anxiety somewhat. The reason people want to increase growth hormone through ghrelin is that ghrelin itself can impact the growth hormone pathway pretty potently, giving you really robust increases in growth hormone. But because there are ghrelin increases as well, you get big increases in hunger and anxiety in some people.

The most commonly discussed Category 2 peptide is ipamorelin. Don't confuse ipamorelin with tesamorelin — tesamorelin is a Category 1 growth hormone releasing hormone peptide; ipamorelin is Category 2. Ipamorelin increases growth hormone release by two mechanisms: it increases it directly and it tends to suppress something called somatostatin — somatostatin acts as a brake or antagonist on growth hormone release. So with ipamorelin you're essentially removing the brake on growth hormone release, allowing more growth hormone to be released. It also tends to really improve sleep, but again by increasing the amount of deep sleep — we don't know whether or not it does that at the expense of REM sleep.

Another Category 2 peptide is hexarelin. Hexarelin is available by prescription and it is the strongest stimulator of growth hormone release, which leads many people to want it. Indeed, the growth hormone pulses from hexarelin can be as great as two to three times more than with other growth hormone secreting peptides. However, hexarelin can also dramatically increase prolactin — which can cause suppression in libido, fluid retention, and a kind of feeling of malaise at high levels — and perhaps most problematically, hexarelin can desensitize the receptors for growth hormone releasing hormone such that your system will no longer respond to hexarelin, to any other peptide, or perhaps most importantly to any endogenous growth hormone releasing hormone that you would naturally make. So if you're going to explore hexarelin, make sure you're working with a physician, make sure you're not taking too much of it or for too long, and keep an eye on prolactin levels.

There are also GHRP-2, GHRP-3, and GHRP-6 — different amino acid sequences all designed to achieve the same thing: more growth hormone. Things like GHRP-3 can potently increase growth hormone but are known to also potently increase prolactin and cortisol, leading to more than a doubling of circulating cortisol. Depending on how well regulated cortisol is across the time of day, that can be problematic — you want cortisol levels high in the early part of the day but very low in the later part of the day and at night. Keep in mind that almost always, these growth hormone peptides — whether Category 1 or Category 2 — are taken before bed, typically 20 to 30 minutes before sleep, and it's always suggested they be taken at least an hour and a half after eating and that you don't eat for at least 30 minutes afterwards, because elevated blood sugar or food in the gut will reduce their potency at increasing growth hormone and IGF-1.

MK-677 is simply an oral, non-injectable version of these GHRPs and it tends to have the same issues that the other GHRPs have — elevated cortisol and in some cases elevated prolactin as well.

## [00:59:09] Peptides for Growth Hormone & IGF-1, Risk; Combinations & Dosing

To zoom out from all this: yes, there are synthetic peptides that can potently increase growth hormone and IGF-1. In Category 1 we have sermorelin and tesamorelin, both FDA approved for certain purposes and being used off-label for increasing growth hormone and IGF-1. They are taken anywhere from three to five times per week. Tesamorelin lasts a little bit longer than sermorelin. CJC-1295 is the third in that Category 1, but it may have safety issues that still need to be resolved. In Category 2, hexarelin is very potent at increasing growth hormone but can potentially increase other things and can cause receptor desensitization. Ipamorelin increases growth hormone directly and suppresses somatostatin. Then GHRP-2, -3, -6, and MK-677 all potently increase growth hormone but need to be considered in light of the fact that they cause big increases in cortisol and in some cases receptor desensitization.

Many peptide vendors and physicians will combine different growth hormone promoting peptides — for instance, sermorelin or tesamorelin in combination with hexarelin, or ipamorelin in combination with CJC-1295. I'm not opposed to that approach, but you want to make sure the relative dosing of each peptide avoids unnecessary increases in prolactin and cortisol. The logic of combining different things is that different amino acid sequences are designed to stimulate different modes of action within the same pathway — some reduce visceral adiposity more, some promote deep sleep more, some promote muscle growth more. When people are combining things in cocktail, it's not necessarily a bad thing, but you want to be working with someone who's very familiar with peptides and understands how they work alone and in combination.

There are of course risks to taking anything but in particular to augmenting the growth hormone pathway. When people take growth hormone itself, common risks include carpal tunnel syndrome — this has to do with its potent increase of cartilage growth — active changes in the structure of one's head and face and body, the so-called lean but distended gut, changes in the face like a thickening of the bone above the brow, changes in skin texture. When people take growth hormone promoting peptides, the changes in body structure are not as dramatic as when taking growth hormone itself. But beyond cosmetic changes, keep in mind that anytime we augment growth hormone — either by taking it directly or by taking a peptide that increases the amount we release — we are increasing our tumor growth risk and our cancer risk, because growth hormone and IGF-1 are somewhat indiscriminate in terms of the tissues they promote the growth of. If you have a small tumor somewhere and you're taking exogenous growth hormone or increasing growth hormone release via a peptide, you will likely increase the size of that tumor. And if you're taking both a peptide to increase growth hormone and something like BPC-157, you could potentially increase both the size and the vascularization of a given tumor.

Why in the world would anybody take this stuff? People like the effects of having elevated growth hormone — the effects of recovering from injury more quickly. But there's always a trade-off between potential benefit and potential risk. For the growth hormone secretagogues, sermorelin and tesamorelin in particular are FDA approved as compounds.

If you're considering taking any of these compounds: if you're younger than 30, I don't know why you'd want to augment growth hormone unless you and your doctor decide there's a clinical need, because you're already making a lot of growth hormone. If you're older than 30 and interested in these compounds, you want to make sure you don't have any tumors or cancers that could be exacerbated, and really think about using the minimal effective dose and perhaps the mildest of these different compounds in order to not desensitize any of the receptor pathways. I personally tried sermorelin for a short while — the reductions in REM sleep were problematic enough for me that I decided not to continue.

## [01:06:12] Longevity: Thymosin Beta-4, Epitalon (Epithalon)

Peptides involved in longevity — this is going to be a relatively quick discussion. The main ones in this category, besides thymosin beta-4 — which we talked about earlier and which is a peptide naturally released from the thymus that depletes over time — is epitalon, also sometimes spelled and pronounced epithalon.

As with BPC-157, there are quite a few animal studies exploring epitalon and its effects on various tissues as well as the naturally occurring peptide that it's meant to resemble. Epitalon is a peptide secreted from the pineal gland. The pineal gland is a gland most people associate with melatonin release — the pinealocyte cells within it secrete melatonin at night, which makes us feel sleepy and helps us fall asleep. Melatonin is suppressed by light viewed by the eyes.

But the pineal makes other things besides melatonin. It also makes a peptide called epithalamin, especially early in life. Epithalamin is associated with various anti-inflammatory effects on other cells and tissues in the body, and it does appear to be able to adjust telomere length, which is a feature of cells thought to be associated with the longevity of cells or how long they live. The relationship between telomeres and longevity is a controversial one — people were very excited about this some years back, then the idea was batted down, and now it's a back and forth within the field.

Epitalon is available as a synthetic compound. It can be obtained in clean form from compounding pharmacies and a good number of people will use it as a longevity agent based largely on animal data showing that it can suppress tumor growth, increase telomere length, and to some extent recalibrate the circadian rhythm changes and disruptions in melatonin patterns that occur as animals — and perhaps as humans — age.

We know that as we age the amount of melatonin we release decreases: melatonin levels are very high in babies and teens compared to people of middle age and elderly age. Likewise, epithalamin levels decrease with time, and as a consequence markers of tissue inflammation also increase, because you're removing this anti-inflammatory compound that's released each night.

The overall point about peptides for longevity can be summarized simply: just as we have a thymus early in life that secretes certain things that seem to accelerate robust tissue healing, and as the thymus disappears tissue healing gets less robust — that's the logic for taking things like thymosin beta-4 and TB-500 — so too we have the pineal secreting epithalamin early in life. And yet there are still no clinical trials that point directly to taking a specific amount of epitalon several times per week as a way to extend life.

## [01:12:09] Vitality: Melanotan, PT-141 (Vyleesi), Risks

The fourth and final category of peptide effects are effects on vitality — both mood and libido. The main players within this category are the so-called melanocyte-stimulating hormone related peptides.

To give some background: the pituitary gland has a middle or medial segment from which a hormone called melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) is released. MSH has the effect of stimulating pigmentation of the skin by activating melanocytes within the skin. The peptides melanotan 1, melanotan 2, melanotan 3, melanotan 4, and melanotan 5 are different peptides — with different amino acid sequences — all of which mimic naturally occurring MSH but act preferentially on one set of MSH receptors or another in order to get different effects.

The melanocortin system is a system whereby viewing light or getting light on the skin — typically ultraviolet B light, so basically sunlight — stimulates the melanocortin system. The pathway goes from the eyes to the hypothalamus, from the hypothalamus to the pituitary, then MSH is released into the bloodstream, travels to the melanocytes, and causes pigmentation of the skin. In parallel, that same stimulus stimulates the release of dopamine. For anyone who has lived in a part of the world with very dark winters and then bright summers, you're probably familiar with the fact that when the sun comes out, people feel better, they have more energy, they're more motivated — libido tends to increase. This is the consequence of sunlight activating the melanocortin system. This system is very active in other animals as well — animals that are white or pale during the winter will, as spring arrives, darken in their pelage as sunlight stimulates this same system, and in combination dopamine is increased, libido is increased, and the animals start breeding in the spring and summer months. It's a well-conserved system across species.

The five different synthetic melanotan peptides each activate different receptors to different degrees. Some can cross the blood-brain barrier and some can't, and as a consequence some impact mood and libido and others don't. Melanotan 1 does not cross the blood-brain barrier but does stimulate the melanocytes of the skin, leading to tanning or darkening of the skin. Melanotan 2, 3, 4, and 5 also lead to darkening of the skin but, because they can cross the blood-brain barrier, they cause effects at the level of psychology — generally increasing mood and libido and decreasing appetite, things associated with the transition from winter to spring and summer.

PT-141 falls into this category of activating the melanocortin system. PT-141 is also known as the prescription drug Vyleesi. PT-141/Vyleesi is FDA approved for the treatment of premenopausal hypoactive sexual desire in women. Men also will take Vyleesi for hypoactive sexual desire, prescribed off-label by physicians.

Some side effects associated with these compounds: one of the more common ones is nausea, because there are MSH receptors all throughout the gut. They can also cause flushing of the skin and blood pressure increases. Folks with melanoma should be very cautious about using any of the peptides that stimulate melanocytes, because that could potentially exacerbate melanoma.

## [01:17:21] Vitality: Kisspeptin

Kisspeptin is a peptide in the category of vitality and libido. Kisspeptin wasn't discovered that long ago. It's a peptide naturally made within the brain and it's upstream of some of the hypothalamic signals that activate the pituitary for hormone production and reproduction.

The pathway: the pituitary releases two hormones in both males and females — luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). FSH, as the name suggests, stimulates the growth of the follicle — the egg in the female — and stimulates sperm production in males. LH stimulates testosterone production from the gonads in males and also stimulates estrogen production and to some extent testosterone production in females as well. The hormone that stimulates LH and FSH release is called GnRH, or gonadotropin-releasing hormone, and it comes from the hypothalamus. The signal that turns on GnRH is kisspeptin. So the cascade goes: kisspeptin → GnRH → LH → FSH → testosterone and estrogen.

It's very clear that kisspeptin is involved in the activation of puberty — the transition from prepubertal to postpubertal stages of life. It's also involved in the downstream effects of having elevated LH and FSH, including elevated vitality that includes both energy and in some cases libido.

There's naturally occurring kisspeptin, and there's now synthetically generated kisspeptin designed to mimic it. It's actually prescribed for what's called hypothalamic amenorrhea — the loss or absence of menstrual cycles that is the consequence of deficits within the hypothalamus itself — not something within the ovary, but a deficit of the hypothalamus to promote LH, FSH, and the downstream hormones testosterone and estrogen. Incidentally, there are also kisspeptin antagonists — drugs designed to suppress kisspeptin — and those are used to treat some of the symptoms of menopause including night sweats and some of the so-called vasomotor symptoms.

There are people within the landscape of peptide therapeutics — physicians and other practitioners — who take kisspeptin peptides as a way to stimulate these pathways for the specific purpose of increasing vitality as it relates to libido and mood, and to get the downstream increases on testosterone and estrogen. The use of kisspeptin to increase vitality and libido is a bit of a wild card. We don't yet know all the effects of kisspeptin — it was fairly recently discovered. Every time we look at a given peptide, whether it's ghrelin, hypocretin, neurexin, or GLP-1, what we find are these pleiotropic effects — there is rarely if ever one specific effect.

## [01:21:46] Peptides, Potential Benefits, Side-Effects & Risks

The landscape of peptides is an enormous one and it's one for which we are just now really starting to appreciate how many different peptides the human body and brain make. It's probably not an overestimate to say there are hundreds of thousands of different peptides, each with multiple and sometimes even overlapping and synergistic effects.

I do understand the excitement about peptide therapeutics. I think for a lot of people that want to improve their physical health and mental health, recover from injuries more quickly, seek particular aesthetic changes or mood changes, I understand the gravitational pull. But I have noticed that the discussion around peptides — because it's often in contrast to the discussion around hormone therapies like testosterone therapy and estrogen therapy — people inadvertently assume that peptides are all safe or innocuous. People assume that they are potent enough to do certain things we want, but because they're not hormone therapies per se, that they are free of side effects and risk. That's wrong. These are very potent compounds. They have lots of different effects and we are in the early stages of exploring peptide therapeutics.

If you want to explore peptides, work with a really good board-certified physician, make sure the sourcing is really clean, do regular blood testing, and monitor for any potential tumor growth. I also want to emphasize — I'm not here to tell you what to do or what not to do, but if you have it in mind that peptide therapeutics, because they aren't hormone therapies, are not without their potential risks — you would be wrong.

All that said, it's very exciting to see what's happening with peptide therapeutics. I'm excited about their potential for both the treatment of disease as well as for augmentation of mental and physical health. It's something we're definitely going to be exploring more on this podcast, both with expert guests and in solo episodes going forward.
