---
title: "The Science of Hearing, Balance & Accelerated Learning"
type: transcript
episode_date: "2021-07-05"
episode_number: 27
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
youtube_id: JVRyzYB9JSY
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:00] Overview of Topics

Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all about hearing and balance and how you can use your ability to hear specific things and your balance system in order to learn anything faster. The auditory system, meaning the hearing system, and your balance system, which is called the vestibular system, interact with all the other systems of the brain and body and, used properly, can allow you to learn information more quickly, remember that information longer and with more ease and you can also improve the way you can hear.

You can improve your balance. We're going to talk about tools for all of that. This is one area of science, where we understand a lot about the cells and the mechanisms in the ear and in the brain and so forth. So we're going to talk about that a little bit, and then we're going to get directly into protocols, meaning tools. We're also going to talk about ways in which the auditory and balance system suffer. We're going to talk about tinnitus, which is this ringing of the ears that, unfortunately, for people that suffer from it, they really suffer. It's very intrusive for them. We're going to talk about some treatments that can work in some circumstances and some of the more recent emerging treatments that I think many people aren't aware of.

We're also going to talk about this, what seems like kind of a weird fact, which is that 70% of people, all people, make what are called otoacoustic emissions — their ears actually make noises. Chances are your ears are making noises right now, but you can't perceive them. And yet those can have an influence on other people and animals in your environment. It's a fascinating aspect of your biology. You're going to learn a lot about how your biology and brain and ears and the so-called inner ear that's associated with balance, you're going to learn a lot about how all those work, you're going to learn a lot of neuroscience.

I'll even tell you what type of music to listen to. And if you listen to me, you can leverage that in order to learn faster. Before we begin talking about the science of hearing and balance and tools that leverage hearing and balance for learning faster,

## [00:02:20] Protocol: New Data for Rapid Learning

I want to provide some information about another way to learn much faster. There's a paper that was published recently. This is a paper that was published in Cell Reports, an excellent journal. It's a peer-reviewed paper from a really excellent group, looking at skill-learning. Now, previously, I've talked about how, in the attempt to learn skills, the vital thing to do is to get lots of repetitions. You've heard of the 10,000 hours thing, you've heard of lots of different strategies for learning faster, 80/20 rule and all that; the bottom line is you need to generate many, many repetitions of something that you're trying to learn.

And the errors that you generate are also very important for learning. It also turns out that taking rest within the learning episode is very important. I want to be really clear what I'm referring to here. In earlier episodes, I've discussed how when you're trying to learn something it's beneficial, it's been shown in scientific studies, that if you take a 20-minute shallow nap or you simply do nothing after a period of learning, that it enhances the rates of learning and the depth of learning, your ability to learn and remember that information. What I'm about to describe are new data that say that you actually should be injecting rest within the learning episode.

Now I'm not talking about going to sleep while learning. This is the way that the study was done: the study involved having people learn sequences of numbers or keys on a piano. So let's use the keys on a piano example. They asked people to practice a sequence of keys, G-D-F-E-G; G-D-F-E-G; G-D-F-E-G. And they would practice that either continually for a given amount of time, or they would just do that for 10 seconds — they would play G-D-F-E-G for 10 seconds, and then they would take a 10-second pause or rest. They would just take a period of time where they do nothing for 10 seconds, then they would go back to practicing.

So the two conditions, essentially, were to have people practice continually, lots of repetitions, or to inject or insert these periods of 10 seconds idle time where they're not doing anything, they're not looking at their phone, they're not focusing on anything, they're just letting their mind drift wherever it wants to go and they are not touching the keys on the keyboard. What they found was that the rates of learning, the skill acquisition and the retention of the skill was significantly faster when they injected these short periods of rest, these 10-second rest periods. And the rates of learning were, when I say significantly faster, were much, much faster.

I'll reveal what that was in just a moment, but you might ask why would this work? Why would it be that injecting these 10-second rest periods would enhance rates of learning? What they called them was micro-offline gains because they're taking their brain offline from the learning task for a moment. Well, turns out the brain isn't going offline at all. You've probably heard of the hippocampus, the area of the brain involved in memory and the neocortex, the area of the brain that's involved in processing sensory information. Well, it turns out that during these brief periods of rest, these 10-second rest periods, the hippocampus and the cortex are active in ways such that you get a 20 times repeat of the G-D-F-E-G.

It's a temporal compression, as they say. So basically, the rehearsal continues while you rest, but at 20 times the speed. If you were normally getting just five repetitions per 10 seconds, now you multiply that times 20. In the rest periods, your brain has practiced it 100 times. We know this because they were doing brain imaging, functional imaging of these people with brain scanners while they were doing this. This is an absolutely staggering effect and it's one that, believe it or not, has been hypothesized or thought to exist for a very long time.

This effect is called the spacing effect. And it was actually first proposed by Ebbinghaus in 1885. And since then, it's been demonstrated for a huge number of different, what they call domains, in the cognitive domain — so for learning languages, in the physical domain, so for learning skills that involve a motor sequence. It's been demonstrated for a huge number of different categories of learning. If you want to learn all about the spacing effect and the categories of learning that it can impact, there's a wonderful review article. The title is "Parallels Between Spacing Effects During Behavioral and Cellular Learning." What that review really does is it ties the behavioral learning and the improvement of skill to the underlying changes in neurons that can explain that learning.

I should mention that the paper that I'm referring to, the more recent paper that injects these 10-second micro-offline gains rest periods, is the work of the laboratory of Leonard Cohen — published in Cell Reports. So the takeaway is if you're trying to learn something, you need to get those reps in, but one way that you can get 20 times the number of reps in is by injecting these little 10-second periods of doing nothing.

Again, during those rest periods, you really don't want to attend to anything else, as much as possible. You could close your eyes if you want, or you can simply wait and then get right back into generating repetitions. And if you can, based on the scientific data, you would also want to take a 20-minute nap or a 20-minute decompress period where you're not doing anything after a period of learning. I think those could both synergize in order to enhance learning even further, although that hasn't been looked at yet.

## [00:09:10] Introduction: Hearing & Balance

This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public.

In keeping with that theme, I want to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that, in my opinion, are the very highest quality available. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about their eyeglasses and sunglasses were created with performance in mind. These eyeglasses and sunglasses have a number of features that really make them unique. First of all, they're extremely lightweight, the optical clarity of the lenses is spectacular. And for the sunglasses, they have this really great feature: as you move in and out of shadows, or across the day, the amount of sunshine might change, you always experience the world as clear and bright. They also stay on your face even if you get sweaty. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses, you can go to roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order.

Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker, a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach your health goals. If you want to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman and get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans.

Today's podcast is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that's backed by 25 published studies. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer and get a free one-month trial with their full library of meditations.

## [00:13:53] How We Perceive Sounds

Can you hear me? Okay, well, if you can hear me, that's amazing because what it means is that my voice is causing little tiny changes in the airwaves wherever you happen to be. And that your ears and whatever's contained in those ears and in your brain can take those sound waves and make sense of them. And that is an absolutely fantastic and staggering feat of biology.

So what we call ears have a technical name. That technical name is oracles, but more often they're called pinna — P-I-N-N-A. And the pinnas of your ears, this outer part that is made of cartilage and stuff, is arranged such that it can capture sound in the best way for your head size. The shape of these ears that we have is such that it amplifies high-frequency sounds. High-frequency sounds, as the name suggests, are the squeakier sounds. Low-frequency sound is like a deep snore; high-frequency sound is a shriek or shrill. Now those sound waves get captured by our ears.

Sound waves, for those of you that don't maybe fully conceptualize them, are literally just fluctuations or shifts in the way that air is moving toward your ear and through space. In the same way that water can have waves, air can have waves. So it's reverberation of air. Those come in through your ears and you have what's called your eardrum. And on the inside of your eardrum, there's a little bony thing shaped like a little hammer. So attached to that eardrum, which can move back and forth like a drum, is this little hammer. And that hammer has three parts: they're called malleus, incus, and stapes. But basically, you can just think about it as a hammer. So you've got this eardrum and then a hammer. And then that hammer has to hammer on something. And what it does is it hammers on a little coiled piece of tissue that we call the cochlea.

So this snail-shaped structure in your inner ear is where sound gets converted into electrical signals that the brain can understand. Now the cochlea, at one end, is more rigid than the other. So one part can move really easily and the other part doesn't move very easily. And that turns out to be very important for decoding or separating sounds that are low frequency like a deep snore and sounds that are of high frequency, like a shriek. Because within that little coil thing we call the cochlea, you have all these tiny little what are called hair cells. Now they look like hairs, but they're not at all related to the hairs on your head or elsewhere on your body. They're just shaped like hair, so we call them hair cells. Those hair cells, if they move, send signals into the brain that a particular sound is in our environment.

So just to give you the mental picture: sound waves are coming in through your ears, your pinnas are shaped in a particular way that funnels them in, the eardrum then moves this little hammer and the hammer bangs on this little snail-shaped thing. And because that snail-shaped thing, at one end, is very rigid and at the other end it's very flexible, it can separate out high-frequency and low-frequency sounds. The fact that this thing in your inner ear that we call the cochlea is coiled is actually really important to understand because along its length it varies in how rigid or flexible it is. At the base, it's very rigid and that's where the hair cells, if they move, will encode high-frequency sounds. And at the top, what's called the apex, it's very flexible and responds to low-frequency sounds like a bass drum.

So basically, sound waves come into your ears, and at one end of the cochlea at the top it's essentially encoding only sounds that are low frequency, whereas at the bottom it responds to high-frequency sounds. And everywhere in between, we have other frequencies, medium frequencies. This should stagger your mind. Because what this means is that everything that's happening around us — whether or not it's music or voices or crying or screaming — is being broken down into its component parts and then your brain is making sense of what it means.

These things I've been talking about, like the pinna of your ears and this little hammer and the cochlea, that's all purely mechanical. It has no mind of its own. It's just breaking things down into high frequencies, medium frequencies and low frequencies. If you don't understand sound frequency, it's really simple to understand — just imagine ripples on a pond. If those ripples are very close together, that's high frequency; they occur at high frequency. If those ripples are further apart, it's low frequency. Just like you can have waves in water, you can have waves in air.

Now we are all familiar with light and how, if you take a prism and put it in front of light, it will split that light into its different wavelengths, its different colors — red, green, blue. Your cochlea essentially acts as a prism. It takes all the sound in your environment and it splits up those sounds into different frequencies. So you can think of the cochlea of your ear, sort of like a prism, and then the brain takes that information and puts it back together and makes sense of it.

## [00:21:56] Your Hearing Brain (Areas)

So those hair cells in each of your two cochlea — because you have two ears, you also have two cochlea — send little wires, what we call axons, that convey their patterns of activity into the brain. And there are a number of different stations within the brain that information arrives at before it gets up to the parts of your brain where you are consciously aware.

If you want nomenclature: the cochlea send information to what's called the spiral ganglion — a ganglion is just a clump, so it means a bunch of neurons. The spiral ganglion information then goes off to what are called the cochlear nuclei in the brainstem. Brainstem is down near your neck, then up to a structure that has a really cool name called the superior olive, because you have one on each side of your brain. And the neurons in the superior olive send information up to what's called the inferior colliculus, only called inferior because it sits below a structure called the superior colliculus. Then the information goes up to what's called the medial geniculate nucleus. And then up to your neocortex where you make sense of it all.

You don't have to remember all that, but you should know that there are a lot of stations in which auditory information is processed before it gets up to our conscious detection. And there is a good reason for that, which is that more important than knowing what you're hearing, you need to know where it's coming from.

## [00:23:48] Localizing Sounds

It's vital to our survival that if something is falling toward us, we know if it's coming to our right side, if it's going to hit us from behind — we have to know, for instance, if a car is coming at us from our left or from our right. Our visual system can help with that, but our auditory and visual systems collaborate to help us find and locate the position of things in space.

One of these stations, deep in your brainstem, is responsible for helping you identify where sounds are coming from through a process that's called interaural time differences. And that sounds fancy, but really, the way you know what direction something is coming from is because the sound lands in one ear before the other. You have neurons in your brain that calculate the difference in time of arrival for those sound waves in your right versus your left ear. If they arrive at the same time, you assume that thing is right in front of you. If it's off to your right, you assume it's over on your right. And if the sound arrives first to your left ear, you assume, quite correctly, that the thing is coming toward your left.

But what about up and down? A sound coming from above is going to land on your right ear and your left ear at the same time. A sound from below is going to land on your right ear and your left ear at the same time. So the way that we know where things are in the up and down plane is by the frequencies. The shape of your ears actually modifies the sound depending on whether or not it's coming straight at you, from the floor, or from high above. So already at the level of your ears, you are taking information about the outside world and determining where that information is coming from.

Now, all of this happens very, very fast and it's subconscious. But now you know why if people really want to hear something, they make a cup around their ear. They essentially make their ear into more of a fennec fox type ear — those big, tall ears. When people lean in with their hand like that, they're giving themselves a bigger pinna. And if they really want to hear something, they do it on both sides. So this isn't just gesturing; this actually serves a mechanical role.

## [00:28:00] Ear Movement: What It Means

So now you're probably starting to realize that these two things on the side of our head that we call ears are there for a lot more than hanging earrings on or for other aesthetic purposes. They are very powerful devices for allowing us to capture sound waves from our environment.

Can you move your ears? It turns out that unlike other animals, humans are not terrifically good at moving their ears. Other animals can move their ears even independently — some dogs can do that really well. But about 60% of people can move their ears consciously without having to touch their ear. The typical distances that people can move them is usually no more than two or three millimeters. It's subtle. If you move your eyes all the way to the left or all the way to the right, you might feel a little bit of a contraction of the muscles that control ear movement.

Can you raise one eyebrow? People who can raise one eyebrow very easily, almost always, can move their ears without having to touch them. It's controlled by the same motor pathway. And there does seem to be a small but statistically significant sex difference in the ability to move one's ears — typically, men can do this more than women can, although plenty of women can move their ears as well.

What we're really talking about here is a system of the brain, but also of the body — of the musculature for localizing things in space. One of the things that we share very closely with other primates, like macaque monkeys and chimpanzees, is that our ears are remarkably similar to their ears. The eyes of certain monkeys like macaque monkeys are remarkably similar to human eyes. There's a nice scientific paper by an author whose last name is Code, published in 1995, that discusses some of the sex differences in ear movement control, as well as the relationship between ear movements and eye movements. It covers some of the underlying biology and some theories as to why humans would have this so-called vestigial or ancient carry-over of a system for moving our ears.

## [00:33:00] Your Ears (Likely) Make Sounds: Role of Hormones, Sexual Orientation

What I'm about to describe are called otoacoustic emissions. And otoacoustic emissions, as the name suggests, are sounds that your ears make. Believe it or not, 70% of people make noises with their ears, but they don't actually detect them. Their ears are making noise that's cast out of the ear — these otoacoustic emissions can actually be detected by microphones. Sometimes they can be detected by other people in the room if they have very good hearing.

Now, it turns out that females who report themselves as heterosexual have a higher frequency of otoacoustic emissions than do men who report themselves as heterosexual. Women who report themselves as homosexual or bisexual make fewer otoacoustic emissions than heterosexual women. These are data that come from Dennis McFadden's lab at the University of Texas, Austin. He actually discovered these differences without looking for them — he was studying hearing and noticed the group differences in otoacoustic emissions when people came into his laboratory. They started asking people about their sex and about their sexual orientation, and these differences fell out of the data.

What these data really underscore is that exposure to certain combinations of hormones during development are very likely shaping the way that our hearing apparati — meaning the cochlea and the pinna and all sorts of things — how those develop and how those function throughout the lifespan. We did do an episode on hormones and sexual development, which gets much deeper into the other effects that hormones have on the developing brain and body.

## [00:35:30] Binaural Beats: Do They Work?

I get a lot of questions about so-called binaural beats. Binaural beats, as their name suggests, involve playing one frequency of sound to one ear and a different frequency of sound to the other ear. And the idea is that the brain will take those two frequencies of sound and, because the pathways that bring information from the ears into the brain eventually cross over and share that information with both sides of the brain, the brain will average that information and come up with this sort of intermediate frequency. The rationale is that those intermediate frequencies place the brain into a state that is better for learning — more focused for encoding new information, more relaxed if anxious, and so on.

So what does the scientific data say about binaural beats? The science on binaural beats is actually quite extensive and very precise. Sound waves are measured in hertz or kilohertz. Delta waves — one to four hertz, very low frequency — can help in the transition to sleep and for staying asleep. Theta rhythms — four to eight hertz — can bring the brain into a state of subtle sleep or meditation, deeply relaxed but not fully asleep. Alpha waves — eight to 13 hertz — can increase alertness to a moderate level, a great state for recall of existing information. Beta waves — 15 to 20 hertz — are great for bringing the brain into focus states for sustained thought or for incorporating new information. And gamma waves, the highest frequency — 32 to 100 hertz — are associated with learning and problem-solving.

All of this maps onto what I've said before about learning really nicely, which is that you need to be in a highly alert state in order to bring new information in. So binaural beats can be effective — but it's not that they're uniquely special for learning. It's just that they can help some people bring their brain into the state that allows them to learn better.

There's very good evidence for anxiety reduction from the use of binaural beats, most effective when the binaural beats are bringing the brain into delta, theta and alpha states. There's good evidence that binaural beats can be used to treat pain, chronic pain — three studies in peer-reviewed journals of good quality. Binaural beats have been shown to modestly improve cognition, attention, working memory and even creativity. But the real boost from binaural beats appears to be for anxiety reduction and pain reduction.

Binaural beats are a relatively inexpensive thing to access. I confess I did use binaural beats a few years ago. I shifted over to other what I call NSDR, non-sleep deep rest protocols in favor of those, but many people like binaural beats and say that they benefit from them, especially while studying or learning.

## [00:43:54] White Noise Can Enhance Learning & Dopamine

White noise has been shown to really enhance brain states for learning in certain individuals, in particular in adults. But white noise actually can have a detrimental effect on auditory learning and maybe even the development of the auditory system in very young children — in particular, in infants.

First, the beneficial effects of white noise on learning. There are some really excellent studies on this. One is entitled "Low Intensity White Noise Improves Performance in Auditory Working Memory Task, an fMRI Study." This study explored whether learning could be enhanced by playing white noise in the background and looked at the underlying neural circuitry. What it essentially illustrates is that white noise, provided that white noise is of low enough intensity — meaning not super loud, not imperceptible, so not so quiet that you can't hear it but not super loud — it actually could enhance learning to a significant degree. Another terrific article: "The Effects of Noise Exposure on Cognitive Performance and Brain Activity Patterns" — a study involving 54 subjects. They evaluated mental workload and attention under different levels of noise exposure and found, again, that provided the white noise is not extremely loud, it could really enhance brain function for sake of learning.

Now, the deeper mechanism: a paper published in the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience in 2014 — "White Noise Improves Learning by Modulating Activity in Dopaminergic Mid-Brain Regions and Right Superior Temporal Sulcus." What this study shows is that white noise can really enhance the activity of neurons in what's called the substantia nigra VTA. The substantia nigra VTA is a very rich source of dopamine — it's perhaps the richest source of dopamine neurons. And basically, what appears to happen is that white noise itself can raise the baseline levels of dopamine being released from this area. So we're starting to get a more full picture of how particular sounds in our environment can increase learning — in part through the release of dopamine from the substantia nigra.

So it does appear that turning on white noise at a low level can allow you to learn better because of the ways that it's modulating your brain chemistry. How loud or how soft should that white noise be? In these studies, it seemed that white noise that could be heard by the person — loud enough that they could hear it, but not so loud that they felt it was intrusive or irritating. So what you're going to have to do is adjust that white noise to the place where it's not interfering with your ability to focus, but rather it's enhancing your ability to focus. A good rule of thumb is to put it probably in the lower third of any kind of volume dial.

## [00:51:00] Headphones

I do want to mention something about headphones before I talk about white noise in the developmental context and why it can be dangerous there. When you put headphones in your ears, it has this incredible effect of making the sounds like they come from inside your head, not from out in the room. Your brain assumes that the sounds are coming from inside your head, as opposed to from the environment, the moment you put headphones in.

So if you're going to use white noise to enhance studying or learning of any kind, my suggestion would be that if you're using headphones, to keep it quite low. This is an effect on the midbrain dopamine neurons that's a background effect of raising the baseline of dopamine release. You're not turning up the white noise to the point where you're feeling amazing. This is about getting that baseline up just a bit. So I recommend turning the volume up just a bit so that you can focus entirely on the task that you're trying to do.

And really blasting any noise is not good, especially not with headphones in. These hair cells that we talked about earlier — our central nervous system neurons — they do not regenerate, they do not come back. The best way to blow out your hearing for good is to have very loud sounds superimposed on a loud environment. What we call the two-hit model: you can take a stimulus that normally would be below the threshold of injury, add another stimulus at the same time that would also be below the threshold of injury, and then suddenly you've killed the neurons. If you work in a loud environment or you expose yourselves to a loud environment, you really want to avoid big inflections in sound above that.

## [00:55:51] White Noise During Development: Possibly Harmful

I know a lot of people with children have these noise machines that help the kids sleep. And I think kids getting good sleep and parents getting good sleep is vital to physical and mental health and family health. However, there are data that indicate that white noise during development can be detrimental to the auditory system.

Data published in the journal Science — one of the three apex journals along with Nature and Cell — some years ago, by scientist Edward Chang, who is now a neurosurgeon and chair of neurosurgery at UCSF, and his mentor at the time, Mike Merzenich: they published a paper showing that if young animals were exposed to white noise, it actually disrupted the maps of the auditory world within the brain.

So what are these maps? Auditory information goes up into our cortex where we have what are called tonotopic maps. Your cochlea separates out different frequencies, like a prism. Your visual system is organized in a retinotopic map — neighboring points in space are mapped to neighboring points in the brain. In the auditory system, we have tonotopic maps where frequency — high frequency to low frequency and everything in between — is organized in a very systematic way.

White noise essentially contains no tonotopic information. The frequencies are all intermixed. It's just noise. Whereas when I speak, my voice has what's called a certain envelope — it has some low frequencies and some higher frequencies. White noise has no container. It's like all the colors of the rainbow spread out together, which is actually what you get when you get white light. White noise is analogous to white light. So one of the reasons why hearing a lot of white noise during development for long periods of time can be detrimental is that these tonotopic maps don't form normally — at least they don't in experimental animals.

Every single scientist I consulted with said: there's neuroplasticity during sleep. That's when the kid is sleeping. And I don't know that you'd want to expose a child to white noise the entire night, because it might degrade that tonotopic map. It might not destroy it, but it could make it a little less clear — like taking the keys on the piano and taping a few of them together.

So if you are in a position to make the choice about what to put in a very young child's sleeping environment, white noise might be something to consider avoiding. I think most pediatricians are not going to be aware of these data, but auditory physiologists and audiologists would have opinions about that.

Once your auditory system has formed, once it's established these tonotopic maps, then the presence of background white noise should not be a problem at all. In fact, it shouldn't be a problem at all because you're also not attending to it — it's playing at a low enough volume that you forget it in the background, and it's supporting learning by bringing your brain into a heightened state of alertness and especially this heightened state of dopaminergic activation of the brain, which will make it easier to learn faster.

## [01:03:25] Remembering Information, The Cocktail Party Effect

There are a lot of reasons to want to get better at learning information that you hear, not just information that you see on a page or motor skill learning. A lot of classroom teaching, whether or not it's by Zoom or in-person, is auditory in nature. It's also good to get better at listening.

There's a phenomenon called the cocktail party effect. Even if you've never been to a cocktail party, you've experienced and participated in what's called the cocktail party effect. The cocktail party effect is where you are in an environment that's rich with sound — many sound waves coming from many different sources — and you somehow need to be able to attend to specific components of those sound waves. The reason it's called the cocktail party effect is that you and your brain are exquisitely good at creating a cone of auditory attention, a narrow band of attention with which you can extract the information you care about and wipe away or erase all the rest. Now this takes work, it takes attention. One of the reasons why you might come home from a loud gathering and feel just exhausted is because it takes attentional effort — the brain uses up a lot of energy, literally caloric energy, when you are paying strong attention to something.

The cocktail party effect has been studied extensively in the field of neuroscience. Much as with our visual system, we can expand or contract our visual field of view — going from panoramic vision to a very focused vergence point directly in front of us. Well, we can expand and contract our auditory field of view, so to speak, our auditory window. You can try this next time you are in an environment rich with noise: tune out all the noise to a background chatter, try not to focus on any one particular sound, and you'll find that it's actually very relaxing in comparison to trying to listen to somebody.

Here I have to credit the laboratory of Mike Wehr at the University of Oregon, who essentially figured out that we are able to extract particular sounds amidst a huge background of chatter because we pay attention to the onset of words but also to the offset of words. If the background noise is just a bunch of waves of noise, we set up a cone of auditory attention — a tunnel of auditory attention — where we are listening, without realizing it, to the onset and the offset of words.

So one of the more common phenomena we all experience: you go to a party, meet somebody new, exchange names, and a minute later you can't remember their name. Is it because you don't care? No — somehow the presence of other auditory information interfered. The signal-to-noise wasn't high enough. So the next time you ask somebody's name, remember to listen to the onset of what they say and the offset. Paying attention to the first and last sounds of the word — chances are, you'll be able to remember that name.

## [01:12:55] How to Learn Information You Hear

More powerful is the work of Mike Merzenich that was done with his then-graduate student, Gregg Recanzone, showing that using the attentional system, we can actually learn much faster and we can actually activate neuroplasticity in the adult brain — something that's very challenging to do. The auditory system is one of the main ways in which we can access neuroplasticity more broadly.

What they did is they had subjects try to learn auditory information, except that they told them to pay attention to particular frequencies — essentially, high-pitched sounds or low-pitched sounds. What they found was just passively listening to a bunch of stuff does not allow the brain to change and for that stuff to be remembered at all. We've all experienced that phenomenon of having someone talk and seeing their mouth moving and trying to listen, and then they walk away and you think: I didn't get any of that.

But what Recanzone and Merzenich discovered was that if you instruct subjects to listen for particular cues within speech, or within sounds, not only can you learn those things more quickly, but you can remap these tonotopic maps in the cortex. You actually get changes in the neural architecture, the neural circuitry in the brain, and this can occur not only very rapidly, but in the adult brain — which prior to their work was not thought to be amenable to change. It was long thought that neuroplasticity could only occur in the developing brain, but the work of Recanzone and Merzenich in the auditory system was some of the first that really opened up everybody's eyes and ears to the idea that the brain can change in adulthood.

So here's how you might apply this. If you are trying to learn music, or you're trying to learn information that you're going to then recite, you can decide to highlight certain words or certain frequencies of sound, certain scales, or certain keys on the piano, and to only focus on those for certain learning bouts. One way that we can remember information is as we write out something that we want to say, we can highlight particular words, we can underline those.

If we're listening to somebody and they're telling us information, we can decide to highlight particular words that they said and write those down. The work of Recanzone and Merzenich and others, including Michael Kilgard who's now got his own lab in Texas, have shown that the cuing of attention to particular features of speech — particular components of speech — and the way in which it increases our level of attention overall, allows us to capture more of the information overall.

So to be concrete: when you're listening, you don't have to listen to every word — you're already listening to every word. All the information is coming in through your ears. What you're trying to extract is particular things or themes within the content. Maybe you decide you're only going to listen to the word "tools," or you're only going to listen to when my voice goes above background. What you decide to focus on isn't necessarily as important as the fact that you're focusing.

The auditory system does this all the time with the cocktail party effect. What I'm talking about is exporting certain elements of the mechanisms of the cocktail party effect — paying attention to the onset and offset of words or particular notes within music, particular scales, or broader motifs of music or particular sentences of words or particular phrases. And in doing that, you extract more of the information overall, even though you're not paying attention to all the information at once.

## [01:18:10] Doppler

Now I'd like to talk about a phenomenon that you've all experienced before, which is called Doppler. So the Doppler effect is the way that we experience sound when the thing that's making that sound is moving. The simplest way to explain this is to translate the sound into the visual world. If you've ever seen a duck or a goose sitting in a pond bobbing up and down, the ripples of water that extend out from that duck or goose are fairly regularly spaced in all directions because that duck or goose is stationary. Now, if that duck or goose were to swim forward, you would immediately notice that the ripples of water close to and in front would be closer together than the ones that trailed behind.

And that is essentially what happens with sound as well. With the Doppler effect, we experience sounds that are closer to us at higher frequency — the ripples are closer together — and sounds that are further away at lower frequency, especially when they're moving past us. So if you've ever heard a siren in the distance, that is the Doppler effect. The Doppler effect is one of the main ways that we make out the direction that things are arriving from and their speeds and trajectories, and it has probably saved your life many, many times.

Some animals such as bats are exquisitely good at navigating their environments according to sound. Bats don't simply listen to whether or not things are coming at them or moving away — what they do is they generate their own sounds. As a bat flies around, it's sending out clicks — actually propelling sound out at a particular frequency that they know. And depending on the frequency of sound waves that come back, they know if they're getting closer to an object or further away from it. So the bat is essentially navigating its world by creating these auras of sound that bounce back onto them from the various objects. They sense you and they're using Doppler to accomplish it.

## [01:22:43] Tinnitus: What Has Been Found To Help?

Now I'd like to talk about ringing in the ears. The ringing of the ears that one experiences is called tinnitus. And tinnitus can vary in intensity, and it can vary according to stress levels, it can vary across the lifespan or even time of day.

We all know that we should do our best to maximize healthy sleep and try to limit our stress. However, there are people that are suffering from tinnitus for which stress or lack of sleep just can't explain the presence of the tinnitus. Tinnitus can be caused by disruption to or damage of these hair cells that we talked about earlier. So that's another reason why, even if you have good hearing now, you want to protect that hearing and really avoid putting yourself into these two-hit environments — environments where there's a lot of background noise, and then you add another really loud auditory stimulus.

And once those hair cells are knocked out, currently, we don't have the technology to put them back. Although many groups, including some excellent groups at Stanford and elsewhere, are working on ways to replenish those hair cells and restore hearing.

There are treatments for tinnitus that involve taking certain substances. In the non-prescription landscape, there are essentially four compounds for which there are quality peer-reviewed data, where there does not appear to be any overt commercial bias. Those are melatonin, ginkgo biloba, zinc and magnesium.

Regarding melatonin: I'm personally not a fan of melatonin as a sleep aid, but there are four studies looking at its effects on tinnitus. Each one of these studies has anywhere from 30 to more than 100 subjects, an age range from 30 years old all the way up to 65 plus. They focused on melatonin at dosages ranging from three milligrams per day for a duration of anywhere from 30 days to six months. And all four of these studies found modest yet still statistically significant effects of taking oral melatonin in reducing the severity of tinnitus. So that's compelling, at least to me.

Ginkgo biloba: there are a few studies, again double-blinded studies lasting one to six months, one with an impressive 978 subjects ranging from age 18 all the way up to 65, that show — as they quote — "limited evidence suggests that if tinnitus is a side effect of something else, in particular cognitive decline, so age-related tinnitus might be helped by ginkgo biloba."

Zinc: zinc supplementation at higher levels than are typical — 50 milligrams per day of elemental zinc — does appear to be able to reduce subjective symptoms of tinnitus in most of the people that took the supplemented zinc. In one double-blinded study of 41 subjects, ages 45 to 64, they saw a decrease in the severity of tinnitus symptoms with 50 milligrams of elemental zinc supplementation.

Magnesium: a Phase II study looking at 19 subjects taking 532 milligrams of elemental magnesium was associated with a lessening of symptoms related to tinnitus. So for tinnitus sufferers out there, you may already be aware of these, you may already be taking these things. I hope that you'll at least consider them and talk to your doctor about them.

## [01:30:40] Aging: How Big Are Your Ears?

I'd like to now talk about balance and our sense of balance, which is controlled by, believe it or not, our ears and things in our ears, as well as by our brain and elements of our spinal cord. But before I do that, I want to ask you how big are your ears.

It turns out that the ears grow our entire life. In the early stage of our life, they grow more slowly. And then as we age, they grow more quickly. You may have noticed that the ears of some individuals in their 70s and 80s get very, very big, relative to their previous ear sizes.

So it turns out that biological age can actually be measured according to ear size. Believe it or not, there is a formula in the scientific literature: if you know your ear circumference — the distance around your ear in millimeters — for both ears, you add them together, divide by two to get the average, then take that number in millimeters, subtract 88.1, and then multiply that value by 1.96, and that will tell you your biological age.

Now why would this be accurate? As we age, there are changes in a number of different biological pathways. One of those pathways is related to collagen synthesis. As we age, not only are our ears growing, but our noses are growing too. A comparison between chronological age and biological age is something of deep interest these days — in the work of David Sinclair at Harvard Medical School and others, with so-called Horvath clocks that have tapped into how the epigenome and the genome can give us insight into our biological age. Just like our DNA and epigenome and some other markers of metabolic and hormone health relate to our age, so does our collagen synthesis. One of the places that shows up most is in our ears. So even though it's a little bit of a bizarre metric, it makes perfect sense in the biological context.

## [01:35:00] Balance: Semi-Circular Canals

The reason why we're talking about balance in the episode about hearing is that all the goodies that are going to allow you to do that are in your ears. They're also in your brain, but they're mostly in your ears. As you recall from the beginning of this episode, you have two cochlea — one on each side of your head — that are little spiral snail-shaped things that convert sound waves into electrical signals. Right next to those, you have what are called semicircular canals.

The semicircular canals can be best visualized as thinking about three hula hoops with marbles in them. Imagine that you have a hula hoop that's not filled with marbles all the way around — it's just got some marbles down there at the base. If you were to move that hula hoop around, the marbles would move around. You've got three of those, and each one of those hula hoops has these marbles that can move around. One of those hula hoops is positioned vertically with respect to gravity — it's basically parallel to your nose and sits upright. Another one is basically at a 90-degree angle to your nose, parallel to the floor if you're standing upright. And the other one is kind of tilted about 45 degrees in between those.

Why is the system there? Those marbles within each one of those hula hoops will only move around if your head moves in a particular way, and there are three planes or three ways that your head can move. Your head can move up and down — that's called pitch, pitching forward or pitching back. Or you can shake your head no, side to side — that's called a yaw. And then there's roll: tilting the head from side to side, the way a cute puppy might look at you, or if somebody tilts their head when they don't really understand what you're saying.

Pitch, yaw and roll are the movements of the head in each of the three major planes of motion. And each one of those causes those marbles to move in one or two of the various hula hoops. They aren't actually marbles — these are little calcium-like deposits, and when they roll back and forth, they deflect little hair cells. And when those hair cells deflect downward, they send information up to the brain. So if you move your head like this, there's a physical movement of these little stones in this hula hoop, they deflect these hairs, which are neurons, send information off to the brain.

This is an exquisite system that exists in all animals that have a jaw. So any fish that has a jaw has this system, a puppy has this system. One of the more important things to know about the vestibular — the balance system — is that it works together with the visual system. When you quickly move your head to the side, those little stones quickly activate those hair cells in that one semicircular canal, and send a signal off to your brain that your head just moved to the side. But also, visual information slides past your field of view. And when those two signals combine, your eyes then lock to a particular location.

## [01:40:35] A Vestibular Experiment

You can try this right now if you're not doing something that requires your attention — and certainly don't do this if you're driving. You're going to sit down and you're going to move your head to the left very slowly with your eyes open. The whole thing should take about five to ten seconds to complete. Now do it very quickly. Now do it slowly again.

What you probably noticed is that it's very uncomfortable to do it slowly, but you can do it very quickly without much discomfort at all. The reason is: when you move your head very slowly, those little stones at the base of that hula hoop don't get enough momentum to move. So you're actually not generating the signal to the brain that your head is moving. And what you'll notice is that your eyes have to go, boom, boom, boom, jumping step-by-step. Whereas if you move your head really quickly, the signal gets off to your brain and your eyes just go — right to the location you want to look at.

So moving your body slowly is actually very disruptive to the vestibular system. And it's very disruptive to your visual system. Now, if you've ever had the misfortune of being on a boat and going through big oscillations, those are very disruptive. We'll talk about nausea in a minute and how to offset that kind of nausea.

What we're doing here is we're uncoupling these two mechanisms — pulling them apart, the visual part and the vestibular part — just to illustrate that normally, these mechanisms in your inner ear tell your eyes where to go, but as well, your eyes tell your balance system, your vestibular system, how to function.

## [01:43:15] Improve Your Sense of Balance

Stand up, if you can do this safely. You're going to stand up and look forward about 10 to 12 feet. Pick a point on a wall, anywhere you like. Stand on one leg and lift up the other leg. You can bend your knee if you like and just look off into the distance about 10 to 12 feet. If you can do that, now close your eyes. Chances are you're going to suddenly feel what scientists call postural sway — you're going to start swaying around a lot. It is very hard to balance with your eyes closed. Why? Because information about the visual world also feeds back onto this vestibular system. The vestibular system informs your vision and tells you where to move your eyes, and your eyes and their positioning tell your balance system how it should function.

So there's a really cool way to optimize balance. You raise one leg and look at a short distance — maybe just about two feet in front of you. Then while still balancing, you're going to step your vision out to a further distance, and then a further distance, and as far as you can possibly see in the environment you're in. And then you're going to march it back to you. What the literature shows is that this kind of balance training — where you incorporate the visual system and extending out and then marching back the point at which you direct your visual focus — sends robust information about the relationship between your visual world and your balance system.

The balance system includes not just these hula hoops, these semicircular canals, but they communicate with the cerebellum — the so-called mini-brain in the back of your brain — which combines that with visual information and your map of the body surface. That pattern of training is very beneficial for enhancing your ability to balance because the ability to balance is, in part, the activation of particular postural muscles, but just as much — perhaps even more so — it's about being able to adjust those postural muscles as you experience changes in your visual world.

Even just two or three minutes a day, or three times a week, maybe five to ten minutes, can make a real difference if you want to enhance balance. You have to combine changes in your visual environment with a static posture — standing on one leg and shifting your visual environment — or a static visual view while changing your body posture. Those two things combine in order to give an enhanced sense of balance. There's a really nice paper published in 2015 called "Effects of Balance Training on Balance Performance" — a systematic review and meta analysis — that supports this.

## [01:48:55] Accelerating Balance

Up until now, I've been talking about balance only in the static sense, like standing on one leg, but that's a very artificial situation. Most people who want to enhance their sense of balance for sport or dance or some other endeavor want to engage balance in a dynamic way — moving through lots of different planes of movement, maybe even sometimes while squatting down low or jumping and landing or making trajectories at different angles.

For that, we need to consider that the vestibular system also cares about acceleration. It cares about head position, it cares about eye position, but it also cares about what direction you're moving and how fast. One of the best things that you can do to enhance your sense of balance is to start to bring together your visual system, the semicircular canals of the inner ear, and what we call linear acceleration.

If you move forward in space rigidly upright, it's a vastly different situation than if you're leaning to the side. One of the best ways to cultivate a better sense of balance — literally within the sense organs and the neurons and the biology of the brain — is to get into modes where we are accelerating forward, typically forward, while also tilted with respect to gravity. This would be the carve on a skateboard or on a surfboard or a snowboard. This would be taking a corner on a bike while leaning into the turn so that your head is actually tilted with respect to the earth. Anytime that we are rigidly upright, we aren't really exercising the vestibular system in balance.

## [01:51:55] Self-Generated Forward Motion

The cerebellum is a very interesting structure because not only is it involved in balance, but it's also involved in skill-learning and in generating timing of movements. The outputs of the cerebellum are strongly linked to areas of the brain that release neuromodulators that make us feel really good — in particular, serotonin and dopamine. And this is an early emerging sub-field within neuroscience, but a lot of what are called the non-motor outputs of the cerebellum have a profound influence, not just on our ability to learn how to balance better, but also how we feel overall.

So for you exercisers out there, if you're doing curls in the gym, squats in the gym, riding the Peloton, or even if you're outside running and getting forward acceleration but you're never actually getting tilted — you're never actually getting tilted with respect to Earth's gravitational pull — you're not really exercising and getting the most out of your nervous system. Activation of the cerebellum in this way — of being tilted or the head being tilted and the body being tilted while in acceleration — has a profound and positive effect on our sense of mood and wellbeing. And it can also enhance our ability to learn information in the period after generating those tilts and the acceleration. That's because the cerebellum has these outputs to brain areas that release neuromodulators like serotonin and dopamine.

This is one of the reasons why, growing up, I knew people who couldn't be motivated to do anything, but they were highly driven to get into experiences of forward acceleration while tilted with respect to gravity — surfing, snowboarding, skiing, cycling. Those modes of exercise seem to have an outsized effect both on our wellbeing and our ability to translate the vestibular balance we achieve in those endeavors to our ability to balance while doing other things.

So for those of you that don't think of yourselves as very coordinated or with very good balance, getting into these modes of acceleration — forward movement or lateral movement while getting tilted, even if you have to do it slowly — could be very beneficial for cultivating a better sense of physical balance. It can really build up the circuits of this vestibular system. And the feel-good components of acceleration while tilted or while getting the head into different orientations relative to gravity — that's also the explanation for roller-coasters.

## [01:56:25] Dizzy versus Light-Headed

Some people feel dizzy, some people get lightheaded. An important question to ask yourself if you're feeling quote-unquote dizzy or lightheaded is: are you dizzy or are you lightheaded? If ever you feel that your world is spinning but you can focus on your thumb — the rest of the world is spinning and your thumb is stationary — that's called being dizzy. Now, if you feel like you're falling, or that you feel like you need to get down onto the ground because you feel light-headed, that's being light-headed.

Oftentimes with language we don't distinguish between being dizzy and being lightheaded. If people are lightheaded, yes, it could be low blood sugar. It could also be that you're dehydrated. It could also be that you are low in electrolytes. Many people have too little sodium in their system, salt, and that's why they feel lightheaded. I have family members who, for years, thought they had disrupted blood sugar — they would get shaky, jittery, lightheaded, feel nauseous. And simply the addition of a little sea salt to their water remedied the problem entirely. Many people who think they have low blood sugar are actually lightheaded because of low electrolytes and because of the way that salt carries water into the system and creates changes in blood volume. Low sodium can often be a source of lightheadedness, as can low blood sugar and, of course, other things as well.

## [01:58:38] Motion Sickness Solution

We were all taught that for dizziness or seasickness, you need to pick a point on the horizon and focus on it. But actually, that's not entirely correct. It is true that if you are down in the cabin of a boat or on the lower deck where all you can see are things up close to you, focusing on things close to you can be problematic. In that case, the advice to go up on deck and get fresh air and look off into the horizon — that part is correct. But focusing your eyes on a particular location on the horizon is effectively like trying to move very slowly while fixating on one location. Your eyes and your balance system were designed to move together.

So really, what you want to do is allow your visual system to track with your vestibular system. This is why sitting in the back of an Uber or a taxi and being on your phone can make you suddenly feel very nauseous. You're in linear acceleration and sometimes you're taking corners, you're braking — your vestibular system has to adjust. If you're looking at your phone or a book, you're uncoupling the visual information from your motion, from your vestibular information. You want those to be coupled. This is also why a lot of people have to drive — they can't be in the passenger seat. When you drive, you get what's called proprioceptive feedback: your body is sending signals to the vestibular system about where you are in space. When you're the passenger, you're just getting jolted around as the person is driving. And if you're looking at your phone, it's even worse.

So, staring out the front windshield is great — but you don't want to fixate. Let your visual system and your vestibular system work together. If appropriate, get into linear acceleration, and you'll improve your sense of balance.

## [02:01:23] Synthesis

Once again, we've covered a tremendous amount of information. Now you know how you hear, how you make sense of the sounds in your environment, how those come into your ears and how your brain processes them. In addition, we talked about things like low-level white noise and even binaural beats, which can be used to enhance certain brain states, certain rhythms within the brain, and even dopamine release in ways that allow you to learn better. And we talked about the balance system and this incredible relationship between your vestibular apparatus — meaning the portions of your inner ear responsible for balance — and your visual system and gravity. And you can use those to enhance your learning as well, as well as just to enhance your sense of balance.

If you're learning from this podcast, please subscribe on YouTube. If you haven't already subscribed on Apple and Spotify, please do that as well. During this episode, I mentioned some supplements. We partnered with Thorne because Thorne has the very highest levels of stringency with respect to the quality of their ingredients and accuracy about the amounts of those ingredients. If you'd like to see the products that I take from Thorne, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman to see all the supplements I take, and you can get 20% off. Last but not least, I'd like to thank you for your time and attention and desire and willingness to learn about hearing and balance. And, of course, thank you for your interest in science.
