---
title: "Improving Sexual & Urological Health in Males and Females | Dr. Rena Malik"
type: transcript
episode_date: "2023-08-14"
episode_number: 152
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
  - Rena Malik
youtube_id: F54qXuTpgfM
search:
  exclude: true
---

# Improving Sexual & Urological Health in Males and Females | Dr. Rena Malik

## [00:00:00] Rena Malik

**Andrew Huberman:** Welcome to the Huberman  Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor  of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Rena Malik. Dr. Rena Malik is a board-certified urologist  and pelvic surgeon. She is an expert in both male and female  urological, pelvic floor and sexual health. During today's episode, Dr. Malik answers the most commonly asked  questions about urinary pelvic and sexual health, for instance, how to avoid getting UTIs, urinary tract infections. We also discuss pelvic floor anatomy and  function as it relates to overcoming an overly tight or an overly relaxed pelvic  floor. This is a key distinction that most people aren't aware of. Many people hear about the need to  so-called strengthen their pelvic floor, but in fact, many people need to do the  exact opposite. They need to learn to relax their pelvic  floor in order to achieve proper urologic and sexual function. So today you'll learn about that. You will also learn about sexual health as it relates to erectile function, as it relates to things like vaginal  lubrication, as it relates to orgasm. We separate out very carefully the  difference between psychological desire and arousal that occurs within the  genitals themselves. And Dr. Malik highlights some important  misconceptions about sexual dysfunction. For instance, that many people believe  that hormones are responsible for sexual dysfunction, but in reality, hormone  dysregulation is responsible for only a very small percentage of sexual  dysfunction. And yet, pelvic-floor and  blood-flow-related issues can account for a large number of cases of sexual  dysfunction in both males and females. So I assure you that today's discussion is going to illuminate many new areas of information, many new tools and protocols  that I'm guessing most people have not heard of. We talk about the neural, vascular — that  is, blood flow related — and muscular aspects of bladder function, prostate  function, Skene's glands. We talk about vaginal health as well as  penile health. We talk about these things as it relates  to different stages across the lifespan. It is a far-reaching and in-depth and  practical conversation that I'm certain everyone will glean important takeaways  from. Now, before we go any further, I do want  to highlight that the content of today's episode is sexual in nature. We talk very directly about different  types of sexual behavior, and we talk about it from the standpoint of the  clinician and biologist. So it is a medical/scientific discussion. That said, we can't be aware of where this podcast is being played and who is listening. And I assert that there are certain themes within today's discussion that would not be suitable for young children. How young? Well, that is certainly not for us to  discern. We realize that different parents and  different households should be the arbiters of what sorts of information  their children are exposed to or not. So my suggestion would be that if you have any concern whatsoever that the content of today's episode would not be  appropriate to be heard by some member of your family, that you please listen to the podcast first, or at least check the timestamps where we've detailed what  specific topics are covered, and then to make your decision accordingly. I should mention that not only is Dr. Malik still an active clinician, she sees  patients daily out of her clinic in Southern California, and we've provided a  link to that clinic in the show note captions. She's also authored dozens of high-quality , peer-reviewed publications in the fields of urology, pelvic health, and sexual  health, and we've also provided a link to that bibliography in the show note  captions. And she is also a spectacular public  educator. She provides zero-cost content about  sexual health, pelvic floor health, and urology as it relates to both men and  women on her YouTube channel. And there, too, we've provided a link to  Dr. Malik's YouTube channel in the show note  captions to this episode. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize  that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and  effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and  science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to  thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that  are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the  biology of the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to  contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to  see clearly. Roka understands this and has developed  their eyeglasses and sunglasses so that you always see with perfect clarity. In addition, they are extremely  lightweight and they won't slip off your face if you get sweaty. Indeed, Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses  were initially designed for performance in sports, but now they include aesthetics  and styles that are really designed to be worn anytime. I, for instance, wear readers at night. I'll sometimes wear sunglasses during the  day when I drive. And of course, I do not wear sunglasses  when I do my morning sunlight viewing, which I highly recommend everyone do their morning sunlight viewing. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses or  sunglasses, you can go to Roka, that's roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to  save 20% off your first order. Again, that's Roka, roka.com. Enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by  Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows  that are customized to your unique sleep needs in order to allow you to get the  best possible night's sleep. Now, sleep is the foundation of mental  health, physical health and performance. When we are sleeping well and enough,  mental health, physical health and performance all stand to be at their best. One of the key things to getting a great  night's sleep is to make sure that your mattress is tailored to your unique sleep  needs. Helix Sleep has a brief two-minute quiz  that if you go to their website, you take that quiz and answer questions such as, do you tend to sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold in the  middle of the night? Maybe you don't know the answers to those  questions, and that's fine. At the end of that two-minute quiz, they  will match you to a mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs. I sleep on the DUSK, a D-U-S-K mattress,  and when I started sleeping on a DUSK mattress about two years ago, my sleep  immediately improved. So if you're interested in upgrading your  mattress, go to helixleep.com/huberman. Take their two-minute sleep quiz, and  they'll match you to a customized mattress for you, and you'll get up to $350 off  any mattress order and two free pillows. Again, if interested, go to  helixleep.com/huberman for up to $350 off and two free pillows. We are always striving to make the  Huberman Lab podcast better, and to that end, we need your help. Over the next month, we are going to be  carrying out a survey. The purpose of the survey is to improve  the Huberman Lab podcast according to your feedback. We put together a brief survey to  understand what you love about the podcast — hopefully you love a few things  at least, or maybe just one thing — as well as what you think could be improved,  or perhaps the many things that you think could be improved about the Huberman Lab  podcast. Basically what we are asking is to get  your feedback so that we can improve any and all things about the Huberman Lab  podcast. The survey does not take long and every  single response will be reviewed. As a thank-you for completing the survey,  we are offering two months free of the Huberman Lab Premium channel. If you're already a member of the Huberman Lab Premium channel, do not worry, you will get an additional two free months for carrying out this survey. You can find the link to the survey in the show notes for this podcast episode and on our website, hubermanlab.com. So if you would be so kind as to take a  few minutes to fill out the survey and help us continue with bringing you the  best possible content here at the Huberman Lab podcast. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. And now for my discussion with Dr. Rena Malik. Dr. Rena Malik, welcome.

## [00:07:45] Pelvic Floor: Urination & Sexual Function

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Thank you. Thank you so much. It's an honor to be here.

**Andrew Huberman:** I'm delighted to have you here. I'm a huge fan of your content. I find that you are able to deliver  critical information about sexual health, urology, pelvic floor, libido, and so many other things that are of immense interest to people, but that ordinarily people  don't really know where to get the high-quality information, and coming to  you for that information means they are going to get the highest-quality  information. I truly believe that because as everyone  will soon hear today, we're going to have a very frank discussion, but one that's  really grounded in science and medicine around sexual health and related topics. These are topics that typically people  learn about, perhaps a little bit in school, maybe at home, from friends,  usually overhearing things as opposed to direct exploratory conversation, online,  pornography. And at least in my experience growing up,  there was education around sexual health, reproductive health, et cetera that was  more oriented toward the fear of things like STIs, fear of unwanted pregnancy, all of which, of course, is extremely important for people to learn about, but  far less about sort of the healthy versions of sexual health. Right?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, absolutely.

**Andrew Huberman:** So this is an especially  important conversation. It's also one that I think has a backdrop  that we should just acknowledge right off the bat, that because the information is  gleaned from multiple sources, and because there are, let's just say, influences out there that relate to the morality of different practices, that there can be  shame, there can be misunderstanding, there can be secrecy, and that further  leads to misinformation. So I'm confident that today you can  clarify things for us and we're going to stay out of those trenches. And the last thing I'd like to say is that because a number of terms will certainly come up that I think for some people,  they're not used to hearing in general discourse. I'm just going to get them out of the way  now. Penis, vagina, anus, prostate, what else  is there? We're going to talk about libido. We're going to talk about intercourse,  oral sex, anal sex. We're going to talk about all of that. So I just want to get that out there so  that we can reduce the shock response.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** I love it. We got to talk about all of it.

**Andrew Huberman:** Great. So to start things off, in anticipation of this episode, I solicited for questions on social media, and I got thousands of  questions, but there was a lot of overlap in the questions. So to start off, I'd like to talk about  pelvic floor, because both males and females have a pelvic floor. And my understanding is that there's a  muscular component, there's a neural-muscular component, there's a blood flow component. What is a healthy pelvic floor? What does a healthy pelvic floor do? And then we can talk about some of the  health issues that an unhealthy pelvic floor creates and some of the ways to  ameliorate an unhealthy pelvic floor.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely. So a pelvic floor, very simply, is  basically a bowl of muscles that's connected to bones that hold up all your  organs. So basically, in your pelvis, there's all  these muscles there, and their function is essentially many. It helps with urination, defecation,  sexual function. It helps with posture. And so having a strong, healthy pelvic  floor can mean that you're having normal urination, you're having normal  defecation, you're having great sex, and that you are also not having ailments like back pain or issues related to those functions and those organs. And so pelvic floor is so important in so  many different aspects, and we deal with it a lot as urologists because it's so  integral to these functions that we take care of. And so when you have an unhealthy pelvic  floor, it can vary from person to person. And while you hear about it a lot in  women, men also suffer from pelvic floor dysfunction or problems with the pelvic  floor. So, basically, pelvic floor dysfunction  happens a lot when you're doing things like, if you were to go to the gym and do  repetitions of any sort of exercise and you didn't rest, then that muscle would  become contracted and short. Very similarly, if your pelvic floor is  overstrained, it can become contracted and short and tight all the time. And you may not know it. It may just be a function of stress,  anxiety, or overuse or posture problems, things of that nature that can affect your pelvic floor. And so this can lead to issues. Let's start with urination. You can have symptoms of urgency,  frequency, meaning you have to go a lot to the bathroom, or you have to go and have  a sudden desire that you can't delay, sometimes even have leakage. In some cases, it can make it difficult to urinate because the pelvic floor is so tense.

**Andrew Huberman:** Or perhaps to  incompletely vacate the bladder.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct.

**Andrew Huberman:** Like, you go to urinate  and then you go back to your desk, or then five minutes later, you have to urinate  again.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Exactly.

**Andrew Huberman:** Something of that sort.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Well, it can be either  that you're not emptying completely or that the pelvic floor muscles are so tense that they're stimulating the bladder so it feels like there's more to go. So it's not always that you're not  evacuating it. It can present in a number of different  ways. And then with sexual function, if it's  very tense, you can have pain. So you can have pain with sex, you can  have pain with erections, you can have pain with ejaculation. Sometimes it can be a lot of different  kind of pain syndromes. And you're like, I have all these  different things going on, and it's really just pelvic floor dysfunction. With GI function, you can definitely have  constipation, and then often you can also have back pain. And so all of these things can happen when your pelvic floor is too tense. Sometimes your pelvic floor can be too  weak. And that can be often because of, we see  this in women a lot, because of childbirth, delivering children. With some people who have neurologic  disorders, they can have weak pelvic floors or connective tissue disorders like Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, for example. These sorts of things can cause weakness  to the pelvic floor, which can then cause, very often what I see is, like  urinary incontinence or leakage, which can, you know, create problems for people  down the line.

## [00:14:13] What is a Healthy Pelvic Floor?

**Andrew Huberman:** Thank you for that. So, first question, how does somebody know if their pelvic floor is too tight from an overcontraction or chronic contraction  of the muscles there versus too weak? And one of the challenges in having this  conversation is that if we were talking about contraction of the calf muscle or  the bicep, I think everyone intuitively knows, because they've seen the shortening of the muscle is when the muscle is quote, unquote flexed, and the lengthening of the muscle is when it is relaxed. Is there a way to describe pelvic floor  muscular shortening in a way that everyone can understand? Would this be — like I said, we're going  to be direct today? Would this be like tensing up one's anus  and the opposite of the movement that one would do before initiating a bowel  movement, and relaxation is sort of the pattern of pelvic floor muscular  relaxation just prior to initiating a bowel movement.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So I will say most people  can't recognize it because it's very difficult to notice. It's sort of gradual, and so it can, over  time, become noticeable with these symptoms. But otherwise, it's very difficult because it's not a muscle that we were ever trained to recognize. Right. Like, you hear about Kegel exercises, for  example, and people talk about how to do them, but that's all you ever hear about  the pelvic floor. And so you don't really know how to kind  of do things in a way that protects your pelvic floor or kind of how to even tell  when it's too tight or not relaxing. And so that takes a sort of training. And so usually when people come to, first  you get an examination to see if your pelvic floor is tight. So for women, it's a pelvic exam, and for  men, it's usually a rectal exam.

**Andrew Huberman:** How does that exam go?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So it's essentially  palpating the muscles and also looking at the function. So we'll say for---

**Andrew Huberman:** So digital palpation,  where, that's a medical technology for, fingers are called digits. So I'm old enough to recognize what a  digital prostate exam is, right. The physician inserts their fingers  through into the anus and feels the prostate to see whether or not it's  swollen or not. And as I'm saying this, I'm realizing  sometimes we think of medicine, quote, unquote, modern medicine, as so evolved. This has basically been the practice for,  what, 50 years, 60 years, maybe 100 years, in the same way that the old school practice for glaucoma, excessive eye pressure, was for the physician to just  touch the eyeball. So, folks, for those of you that think  that medicine has evolved much, it clearly has in many ways. But in any event, so a prostate exam goes  as I just described. What would a pelvic floor exam for a male  and a pelvic floor exam for a female involve at a kind of granular level here?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah. So for women, you can feel the pelvic  floor muscles through the vagina. So you can feel the iliococcygeus, the  pubococcygeus, the levator ani, those are all names of different muscles in this  bowl.

**Andrew Huberman:** This is the physician,  who can feel them with their fingers.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct. And you could, too. You could put your finger in, but you  don't have a reference of normal. Right. So you wouldn't know what a normal pelvic  floor feels like versus a tight one versus a weak one. And so you can assess the tenseness based  on palpation. You can also see if there's tenderness. And so you can assess that based on just a general physical examination. And then also you can observe. So I can say, contract your... Squeeze  your pelvic floor up and in. I can look and see, are they squeezing or  are they pushing? Like, are they coordinated or not? Right. Because that's a function of normal use of the pelvic floor. And sometimes you'll see that they're  discoordinated. You can also assess for sensation in the  area and things like that. That could be consequences of dysfunction.

**Andrew Huberman:** Can there be dysfunction  in laterality? Like the pelvic floor is pulling up into  the right or up into the left?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely. So what typically when you see a pelvic  floor therapist. Now, I'm not a pelvic floor therapist, but these are the people who do the work, right? They work with you on a prolonged basis to help you normalize the function of your pelvic floor. It's like going to the gym with a trainer. Right? They really work with you to get your  pelvic floor functioning correctly. And the first step to that, a lot of  pelvic floor therapists will just align your bones and the way you sit and walk to make sure that you're not straining those muscles by pulling in different  directions.

**Andrew Huberman:** And if a male goes to the physician to get a pelvic floor exam, there's obviously difficulty in putting  fingers into the urethra, one would hope too small an opening. So how are they doing the pelvic floor  exam? Is it external to the body or is it  through the anus?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So some of it's through  the anus. You can feel the muscles through the  anus, and then you can feel the perineal area and feel the muscles there as well as sensation.

**Andrew Huberman:** Okay, so perineal area. So from the outside of the body, the  region between the scrotum and the anus?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes.

**Andrew Huberman:** Okay. So it sounds to me like if people want to  get a high-quality assessment of whether or not their pelvic floor is healthy or  not, they need to see a pelvic floor specialist.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes.

**Andrew Huberman:** That it's not the sort of thing that they could intuit on their own, necessarily.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** It would be difficult. I mean, so there are things you can buy  online, like probes that you can insert in the vagina that will teach you how to do  Kegel exercises and give you some readings, but they're not really meant to  diagnose. They're usually something people use if  they say, have a weak pelvic floor and they want to try to do it at home on their own. So there's nothing that's going to give  you like a baseline reading — is this normal or abnormal?

## [00:19:44] Kegels, Benefits & Risks, Urinary Incontinence

**Andrew Huberman:** Let's talk about Kegels. First of all, who's Kegel?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So he is a gynecologist. I don't remember all the specifics, to be  quite honest, but basically he came up with Kegels, which are a strengthening  exercise for the pelvic floor. And so what it is, what we describe it to  for patients is we say, you're going to, there's a few different ways to describe  it. You're going to use the muscles that you  use when you urinate, but try to stop the flow, but you don't want to do them when  you're urinating because that can create dysfunction. You want to learn what the muscles are and then you squeeze those muscles and relax in between sets, so to speak. And so the other way people describe it is pulling up and in the vagina, or for men, sometimes you'll say it's like the  feeling that you're trying to lift your penis off the floor without touching it. Right. So those are kind of using---

**Andrew Huberman:** That's a good way to  describe it.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So those are kind of the  ways that you can describe those muscles. And so you can squeeze for 5 seconds and  relax for 5 seconds and do them in repetitions. And they're just like any sort of exercise you do, you don't want to start doing 100 of them, right? You want to do them... I tell them  people, I tell patients, do them lying down so that you're only focusing on those muscles, you're not working on your posture, you're not doing anything else. And as you get better with them lying  down, you then sit up and do them. And then once you're good with them  sitting up, you can do them standing and start with 10 to 15 at a time, like once.

**Andrew Huberman:** Ten to 15 repetitions. So, yeah, let's talk sets and rep.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, yeah, 10 to 15  repetitions in the morning, 10 to 15 repetitions at night, maybe one more  during the middle of the day, but don't overdo it, because just like anything,  especially when you're starting out, you can. And if you're doing tons and tons of  Kegels, then you will get a tight, short pelvic floor muscles, and you will then  develop pelvic floor dysfunction. So it's really important to kind of  understand those mechanics, which is why a lot of people think they know how to do  Kegels, but they really don't. And so I always encourage people, if you  have the time and the resources, to go to a pelvic floor physical therapist so they  can really work with you and make sure you're doing them correctly.

**Andrew Huberman:** What are some of the  benefits of Kegels for those that need them?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. So they are typically prescribed for  urinary incontinence, specifically stress urinary incontinence. So leakage that occurs when you have an  increase in your intra-abdominal pressure, like a Valsalva, or coughing,  sneezing, lifting heavy things, jumping on a trampoline. So for those purposes, we use Kegels to  strengthen the pelvic floor, and also in women, pelvic organ prolapse. So when you have weakness of the pelvic  floor, that leads to a bulge that you can visibly see or feel in the vagina. For men, we often prescribe them for  people who have had a prostatectomy, who then subsequently develop leakage after  the prostatectomy, that is, again, stress urinary incontinence. Now, a lot of people use Kegels  recreationally because improving the pelvic floor musculature can lead to more  intense pelvic floor contractions during orgasm, which can be more pleasurable. And so some people do it for those  purposes. But again, I caution people not to overdo  it, because then you can lead to a more tense pelvic floor, which is not where we  want to end up.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yes, I will underscore  that cautionary note. Years ago, I heard about Kegels. I was like, okay, I'll try. It sounds all good, right? I only heard good things about Kegels, and what it quickly resulted in was painful urination. And I thought, this is weird. Everyone's saying Kegels are so great. And the best thing I could do for my  pelvic floor, it seemed, was to avoid Kegels.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes.

**Andrew Huberman:** And a little bit later,  when we're talking about prostate, I'll explain at least what my experience was as it relates to the prostate. But I guess the take-home message that I'm gathering from what you're telling us is that strengthening the pelvic floor is  great. If you have a weak pelvic floor,  strengthening your pelvic floor further, if you have a strong pelvic floor, can be  detrimental.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** It can be. It can be if you overtrain it, just like  if you overtrain anything else. And so if you really want to do Kegels, if you have any symptoms at all like you described, painful urination, or the  things I've described, like pain with erections, pain with ejaculation, pain,  difficulty emptying, any of those symptoms, stop and go see a urologist so  that they can kind of assess your pelvic floor.

## [00:24:08] Pelvic Floor Relaxation; Exercise & Pelvic Floor

**Andrew Huberman:** What is the anti-Kegel?  In other words, if somebody decides that they have a tight pelvic floor, how can  they learn to relax their pelvic floor?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So there's a lot of  different sort of things that you can do. So for women, you can do massage of the  area. You can use vaginal dilators to help relax the muscles. You can take suppositories that have  medications like Valium or baclofen, which are muscle relaxants. And that can help as well. Although they're not treatments, they're  more of a band-aid, but they can help with the symptoms that you're having. And then you can also, I think the best  thing is to work with a physical therapist because they can teach you certain  exercises that will help down train the pelvic floor. For example, one of the ones I tell my  patients is like, happy baby pose. It actually stretches and elongates the  pelvic floor muscles. So doing these exercises regularly will  help you lengthen the pelvic floor muscles.

**Andrew Huberman:** One thing that I've  experienced extreme pain from and that stopping was one of the best things that  ever happened for my pelvic floor, was to not do any kind of crunching movement with my legs crossed. I would go to these yoga classes at one  point in my life, and they'd have everybody do these crunches. And I've always done some abdominal work  here and there during the week if I'm being diligent. But they would have us cross our feet, and that seemed to lead to some pelvic floor discomfort that was similar to what I had  experienced when I did the Kegels.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** So, again, for me,  ceasing the Kegels was one of the best decisions I ever made. I only did them for a short while. I was like, okay, this is clearly not for  me. And I guess that's another point that tell me if you agree or not, that if you hear about something online or on this podcast  or anywhere else, and you try it, and it seems to be sending things in the wrong  direction. Either you're doing it wrong, or it might  not be the right thing for you.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Exactly.

**Andrew Huberman:** I think all too often we  hear, this thing is great, and people jump on that bandwagon, and then they end up  worsening their problems or developing problems where they didn't have them  previously. But is there anything about the anatomy of the neuromuscular connections or vasculature of the pelvic floor that would provide support for my experience there?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** That doing crunches with  legs crossed is essentially, is it possible that it's creating asymmetries in the pelvic floor? And now I'm sure I'm angering yoga  teachers and crunchanistas everywhere. But, you know, hey, if it's a question of  your pelvic floor or a few extra delineations in your abs, you know where  my vote is going.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So there's a couple of  things here that we should dive into. One is that people don't often breathe  correctly during exercise, right. And so diaphragmatic breathing is really  important, which is like a deep breath that expands the diaphragm. Not kind of shallow breathing. That's just in your mouth and throat. And that is actually when you do any sort  of exercise, your trainer will tell you, exhale on the effort. Right? And there's a reason for that, because  when you inhale, your pelvic floor relaxes. When you exhale, your pelvic floor  contracts. And so, actually, that contraction  stabilizes the pelvic floor, so whatever intra-abdominal pressure you're causing to increase from the exercise, whether it's a squat or a crunch or whatever, you're  increasing your abdominal pressure. Your pelvic floor is then contracting to  help stabilize that. And so part of the reason people tend to  hold their breath during crunches, right. They don't do the appropriate breathing. And so that can be part of it. The other thing that can happen with  certain things is that there are nerves and arteries, particularly the pudendal  nerve and the pudendal artery that run through the pelvic floor. So when you get pelvic floor dysfunction,  you can cause decreased blood flow to the pelvic floor muscles, which can affect  sexual function, and you can get nerve inflammation as well, that can also cause  pain. And so this is kind of how it all comes  together.

## [00:28:03] Desire vs. Arousal, Erections: Psychology, Hormones, Blood Flow & Nerves

**Andrew Huberman:** I'm so glad that you  mentioned blood flow. I think our entire discussion today should be framed up, at least in the back of our minds and the minds of our listeners and  viewers, as involving at least three things. Anytime we're talking about erectile  function or dysfunction or pelvic floor function or dysfunction or vaginal  lubrication or lack thereof, we need to think about the hormonal influences, the  blood flow related influences, and the neural influences, including the neural  influences that come from the brain, the signals of arousal, for instance, or lack  of arousal, and so on. So we won't be overly systematic in our  parsing of all this, but I think what you just mentioned raises a really important  point, that sometimes in an effort to do something that's good for the muscles,  like strengthen the muscles, one will cut off blood flow. In fact, one of the more common questions  I got, and I consulted with a couple of exercise physiologists about this, and  they confirmed that a lot of people who squat and deadlift heavy in the gym or  even who just tense their pelvic floor when they're doing things like dumbbell  curls or other exercises, and especially people who seem to do a lot of abdominal  work, reported to me in the questions that they experienced things like erectile  dysfunction, that they experienced things like pain during vaginal intercourse, that essentially they had created some sort of what sounds to me like a hypercontraction of the muscles in that area that were impeding all the things that they wanted,  as either side effects or direct effects of exercise, because many people are  exercising for aesthetic reasons and health reasons, but nowadays, it seems,  especially on the male side... But we will also talk about the role of testosterone  on the female side. A lot of males lift weights in order to  increase their testosterone and, for reasons that are obvious, also want to  have healthy sexual function. And here they are doing this thing that's  very good for increasing testosterone if they're doing it correctly. And testosterone is involved in libido and the male sexual response, and the female sexual response, of course, but they are  impeding their erections. So you can start to see how there are  probably a lot of confused and maybe even distraught people out there. They're trying to do all the right  things, and they're setting up roadblocks and even sending themselves backward in  some cases. So the question is, how does one know  whether or not something like, let's say, low lubrication or pain during vaginal  intercourse or loss of erectile strength or some sort of erectile dysfunction,  whatever it may be, because it can take on different forms, as we'll talk about. How does one know if it's blood flow  related, hormone related, or neural related? And if it's neural related, how does one  know if it's an issue of lack of appropriate signals from the brain,  oversuppression or lack of arousal from the brain, or whether or not it's some  peripheral neural thing of innervation of the penis or vagina?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So I think there's a lot  that we can go into here, but essentially, first you want to find out  very specifically what is going on. Are you getting aroused? Are you having erections? Are you masturbating? Like, there's all these questions that  will help us go down the route.

**Andrew Huberman:** Sorry to interrupt, when  you say aroused, for sake of this discussion, I just want to make sure that  we distinguish between psychological arousal, the desire. I guess here we also have to be precise. Arousal to engage in intercourse, arousal  to desire, essentially, that I think people would learn to recognize. Or are we talking about arousal as the  response of the genitals?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct. So desire and arousal, this is a very  important concept, doesn't always go in one direction. Sometimes you can feel arousal, meaning  you have the telltale signs of arousal. Your nipples get erect, you have more  lubrication if you're a female.

**Andrew Huberman:** Do both male and female  nipples get erect during arousal?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** I believe so.

**Andrew Huberman:** I think so.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** You maybe get the sex  flush, right? You get some redness or warmth feeling. That's your body's response to arousal. And sometimes that can be an erection, and sometimes that's not. Not having an erection does not mean  you're not aroused. It may mean other things, but certainly  that's part of it. And then desire, do you want to have sex? When you think about your partner or  whoever you want to engage with, is there a desire to actually do that? Right? Or is it just more of obligation or other  things? And it doesn't matter if the desire comes  after arousal. For some women in particular, we see that  they may not have the desire right away, but they want to be intimate or close with their partner, and so they'll start just being close with them, and then arousal  will come. And then, oh, yeah, I like this. So then the desire comes after, and that's normal. That's totally fine. So you want to kind of parse that out. And then for men, you can ask, are you  getting erections at night? Because that will tell us the function of  your organ at night versus during the day, where you have also psychogenic  components. Right. You can really get in your head about  erections when you have a problem in the bedroom with performance; it becomes a  vicious cycle. Right. So you have a problem the next time you're really stressed. You're not present, you're not mindful in  the moment with sex, and you're thinking about, oh, my God, am I going to perform  okay? Am I going to perform okay? And then it doesn't perform again, and  it's getting worse and worse, and the anxiety is through the roof, and that's  actually causing your sexual dysfunction. So I think it's important first to  identify those issues and then also for blood flow. A lot of times, we can assess based on,  well, what other comorbidities do you have? Do you have other issues ongoing that may  be affecting your blood flow? Most common, high blood pressure,  diabetes, heart disease, and if you smoke, all of those things will affect  blood flow to the genitals. And so that will point us---

**Andrew Huberman:** Negatively.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Negatively. Negatively. So that will point us to a more vascular  issue. Hormonal issues are very important for  desire, as far as sexual function in terms of erections, there's only 3% of erectile dysfunction that's related to hormones.

**Andrew Huberman:** But that's pure erectile  function.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct.

**Andrew Huberman:** As opposed to desire.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct. Desire is predominantly modulated by the  hormone testosterone for both men and women. In fact, a lot of people don't know this,  but women have more testosterone in their bodies than they actually have estrogen. So testosterone is very important for both men and women for a variety of reasons. And so using that discussion with the  patient will help you kind of identify where you're headed in terms of what you  need to focus on for treatment. There are certain things you can use to  assess blood flow. You can do Doppler ultrasounds of the  penis as well as the clitoris to see if there is good blood flow. You can assess the peak systolic  velocity, which will tell you if there's a problem with arterial inflow versus the  end-diastolic velocity, which will tell you if there's a problem with venous  outflow. And so that can assess those things. There are some tests you can do for nerve  function, although they're very uncommonly done, because mostly we can kind of get  that through clinical report. And unfortunately, if you're having nerve  problems, sometimes it depends on what's causing them, but sometimes they can be  very difficult to reverse, and that's kind of a problem. We know that as people age, their  sensation becomes less. So just through aging, the nerves, the  receptors become less sensitive, and so you will generally have less  responsiveness to the same sensations you did when you were younger. And so that kind of overlays all of this. So it's complex, but really, a lot of it  comes from the discussion you have with your patient, or you kind of really doing  a deep dive in what's going on, like really thinking about each of those  aspects and also what's going on in your relationship and what's going on in your  life, stress, anxiety, how are those playing a role?

## [00:37:07] Pelvic Floor: Medical Professionals & Physical Therapy

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah. So in terms of your pelvic floor, it's  good to get assessed by a physician who specializes in pelvic floor. Now, that could be a urologist, that could be a gynecologist or even a physical medicine rehabilitation doctor that  specializes in pelvic floor health. So typically you'll see in urology, you'll look for people who are board-certified in female pelvic medicine and  reconstructive surgery if you're a woman, if you're a man, maybe sexual medicine,  someone who specializes in sexual medicine would be a good place to look. For gynecologists, again, you want to look at someone who has interest in this area, who does manage pelvic floor. And then in terms of pelvic floor physical medicine rehabilitation, at least when I was in training, there was about 20 PMRs  doctors around the country who really focused on this, so it's not a lot of  people. If you can go to a pelvic floor physical  therapist and you have one near you, that's great as well. You do want to make sure that one, they  do, are certified in pelvic floor physical therapy and that they have taken care of  your gender. So if you have male anatomy, then you want to go to someone who's actually seen men, because a lot of the pelvic floor  physical therapists tend to treat a lot of women. And so that's kind of what I tell my  patients, generally speaking. There's no, at least to my knowledge, no  great resource. And maybe we'll look that up and see if we can find one.

**Andrew Huberman:** That's very helpful. Thank you. Because again, going back to what I said  at the beginning of our conversation, I think there's a lot of shame, or at least  a lack of clarity as to how one gets help for issues that relate to the genitals. Because if you have a headache or you're  having an eye issue, I mean, you sort of know where to go.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** Hopefully your headache  doesn't warrant going to a neurologist, but it might. Eye stuff tends to be ophthalmologists,  optometrists. Right. So I don't think we hear often enough  about where to access the best quality care for these things, so thank you for  that. In thinking about sexual dysfunction, I'd  like to have that conversation, more or less in parallel, if we can, around male  sexual dysfunction and female sexual dysfunction. And I want to make sure that before we do  that, that I'm creating the correct parallel construction as they say. Erectile dysfunction in males is clearly a form of sexual dysfunction. What is the parallel to erectile  dysfunction in females? Is it lack of vaginal lubrication and lack of relaxation of the vagina to have nonpainful intercourse? Is it even possible to have a parallel  conversation about these two things?

## [00:40:15] Sexual Dysfunction, Erectile Dysfunction, Orgasm Difficulty

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, it's different. In some circumstances there are  homologues, right? So the penis is the homologue of the  clitoris.

**Andrew Huberman:** Right.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So the clitoris is  essentially the same sort of spongy erectile tissue that you see in the penis ; it gets erect with arousal, and it actually extends very deep into the pelvis. So it's not just a small little organ,  it's actually quite long. And so you can, in men you can have  erectile dysfunction because you can see it, but in women, you may have difficulty  with orgasm. And it's not exactly a parallel, but  difficulty orgasming in women is multifactorial, and we can get into that. But I think they're different, and I think also sexual dysfunction presents differently in both genders. So when you talk about men, the one visual they see of arousal is erections. And so it becomes very ingrained in your  psyche that if I don't have an erection, I'm not aroused. Right. But there's a lot of reasons that you  might not have an erection that we've sort of touched on, vascular problems,  hormonal problems, neurologic problems, psychogenic issues, and other medications  you're taking. So there are issues that can affect  erectile function, that can be a part of it, where you might feel like you have low desire because your arousal is not there. And that becomes a little bit confusing  for women. What they can assess is their level of  lubrication, if sex hurts, and if they get an orgasm. And so those are kind of the ways you can  look at it.

**Andrew Huberman:** Thank you for fleshing  all of that out. You know years ago, I worked on sexual  differentiation and in particular the role of hormones in sexual differentiation. And indeed, as you described, we learned  because we were taught, and I think people still generally agree, that if one looks  at the embryological origins of the penis and the clitoris, they are essentially  analogous structures. And that a lot of male genital development involves, literally the regression, the disappearance of the female sexual  genitalia and associated organs, müllerian ducts and things like that, and what  would become the ovaries become the testes, et cetera, et cetera. Those are anatomical parallels. But what you just described for us very  beautifully is the sort of functional parallels as it relates to sexual function and dysfunction. So I'm hoping with that framing that we  can knock down a few of these pins in a little less time, because there's a lot to tackle here. First off, I'd like to address the  hormonal issues. You mentioned that only 3% of erectile  dysfunction, and by extension, can we say also female issues with sexual arousal,  are hormonal in origin, is that right?

## [00:43:13] Desire & Arousal Issues; Erectile Dysfunction, Viagra, Cialis (Tadalafil)

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So with desire, yes.

**Andrew Huberman:** Ok.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** They are hormonal in  general. And arousal in terms of lubrication, if  you're using that as a barometer, yes you can see less vaginal lubrication due to  hormones, and I guess I would say 3 to 6% more, you know. Up to 6% we see of erectile dysfunction is hormonal. It's a small percentage of the entirety of erectile dysfunction.

**Andrew Huberman:** Okay. So I think in looking on the landscape of  social media, podcasts, and just in the common mindset, we've all come to believe  that testosterone is pro-libido. It's pro-desire in men and women. I think now people are starting to  appreciate that it's pro-desire in women as well, but certainly in men, and that  dopamine is also associated with desire. And the general public tends to have this  view of estrogen as being sort of anti-libido or anti-male, which is frankly false. In fact, and I've covered this on the  podcast with Dr. Kyle Gillett and with Dr. Peter Attia and another fellow YouTuber,  Derek from More Plates, More Dates, has talked a lot about the fact that if  people, if men take drugs like an anastrozole to suppress their estrogen,  thinking that, oh, it's all about having high testosterone, low estrogen,  oftentimes they crush their libido. Just abolish it. Which has led to a slowly growing, but I  think, positive shift in how people are thinking about estrogen. Estrogen is great for brain function,  estrogen is great for libido in men and women.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct.

**Andrew Huberman:** And that is a revision  of, I think, how most people think of the male sexual response. It's more in keeping with how people think about the female sexual response. Oh, estrogen in the female sexual response. That makes sense, but what we're trying to do here is clarify some of the misconceptions. Now, the reason I mentioned dopamine is  that my understanding is that dopamine is involved in the desire response. We will distinguish desire, the  psychological arousal, from genital arousal, physical arousal, and that  prolactin is associated with the refractory period during which erection  can't occur, another, perhaps, orgasm can't occur in females, et cetera. But my understanding is, that's also not  that simple, and we need to take a step back, perhaps, and just talk about the  physiological underpinnings of the desire and arousal response. So I'll tell you what I was taught, and  then you can tell me where it's wrong.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Sure.

**Andrew Huberman:** I hope. I was taught that the erection response  and the vaginal lubrication response is generated by the parasympathetic nervous  system, the relaxed, the rest-and-digest aspect of the nervous system. Hence why some people can get psychogenic  sexual issues of lack of erection or lack of vaginal lubrication, but that there are individuals out there for whom a lot of alertness, maybe even, and this is a  controversial thing, but for some people, even some sense of aggression or kind of  edginess or excitement, adrenaline, in other words, can stimulate erection or  vaginal lubrication. So it gets tricky. It's not like the textbooks. It's not like they taught us in high  school, as far as I know. I was taught that the arousal response in  males and females is initiated by a parasympathetic sort of relaxed tone. And that as sexual desire and arousal and  sex or masturbation progresses, that it shifts more towards the sympathetic  nervous system, which has nothing to do with emotional sympathy and has everything to do with arousal. The catecholamines — dopamine,  norepinephrine, and epinephrine, also called adrenaline and noradrenaline — are  released. And that the climax response, which may or may not include ejaculation, we have to separate that out, is one that is really  of the stress system of the body. And then in the postcoital or  postejaculatory or postclimax phase, then there's a shift back to the  parasympathetic nervous system. That's where the pillow talk and the  exchange of odors and tastes and other molecules is known to enhance pair bonding through things like oxytocin, vasopressin, and so on. And what I just described is exceedingly  oversimplified, I realize. But is that more or less how the  physiology works?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah. So the way we're taught in medical school  is point and shoot. So point is the parasympathetic nervous  system.

**Andrew Huberman:** All the male audience  will like that one.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** And then you go on to the  sympathetic nervous system. But it makes sense. And the reason that I think you're hearing about this aggression, or these things that are leading to arousal is because  there needs to be a stimulus, right? A visual stimulus, a tactile stimulus,  some sort of stimulus that you're getting that is then causing the release of nitric oxide from the parasympathetic nervous system. And that could be, for some people,  aggression or some form of that, right.

**Andrew Huberman:** Can you tell people about nitric oxide? Because we'll get into this when we talk  about drugs that increase blood flow, Cialis, Viagra, and also nonprescription  drugs, things like L-citrulline, arginine, and watermelon, for that matter. Right? So I read on the internet.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So nitric oxide is  essentially the ignition for, what we say, for erections. The ignition for erections. The reason I talk about erections more  often is when you look at the data, in fact, there was a paper on this where they looked at the number of articles that came up when you put in the word "penis"  and the number of articles that came up when you put in the word "clitoris." And  it was 50,000 about penis and 2000 about the clitoris.

**Andrew Huberman:** Okay. This was actually a major section of the  comments when I asked for questions on Instagram, and comments on comments, and  yeah, how come? Why not? Et cetera? Is that because the urology and sexual  health field was dominated by men? That's going to be the presumption. Or is it because it's easier to study mean? What's going on here?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, I think there's been a lot, I mean you can go back to, like, Freud, where he thought that the female  sexual response was less valuable. And so there are some reasons---

**Andrew Huberman:** Less valuable?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** I guess, I don't know if  that's the right term, but he---

**Andrew Huberman:** Oh no, no, I'm not  challenging your term, I just meant---

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Like, you know, it was  sort of dismissed.

**Andrew Huberman:** He seemed to be obsessed  with it, right?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** But it was more about the  male sexual response than the female sexual response. And so in general, yes, there is, you  know, there were more men in medicine, there was more, and it is easier to study. Right. You can't study the clitoris as, quite as  easy as you can study the male penis response because you can see it visually,  you can inject it and see an erection response. Right. We do this for people who have erectile  dysfunction, they'll take medications that increase blood flow, like Trimix. And you'll inject it into the penis, and  you'll see an erection. So you can actually---

**Andrew Huberman:** Trimix.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Trimix. So there's, it's, it includes---

**Andrew Huberman:** The entire male audience  just went, wait, what are you injecting?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, there are three,  basically, brand names of intracavernosal injections that we use for erectile  dysfunction.

**Andrew Huberman:** I hear "injection in  penis," and I think it's, I like to think that it reflects a natural male response. I sort of, I... taken aback. I don't know, maybe there's a pelvic floor contraction in there someplace.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So it is scary to hear  about. It's a very small needle. It is very well tolerated. I've done it to patients in the office and they look at me and say, you're done. It's not as painful as it seems. And when you are not having erections and  you've tried multiple things, people get to the point where they're willing to try  that. And so, it is very effective. It is the most effective nonsurgical  treatment we have for erectile dysfunction. And it's usually either one medication,  two medications or three. So you can have alprostadil, papaverine,  and what's the third one?

**Andrew Huberman:** That's okay, we can look  at, someone will put it in the comments.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Sure.

**Andrew Huberman:** Surely they will. What is it designed to do? Is it a vasodilator of sorts?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So they work in different  mechanisms, but similar to the medications that we have. PDE5 inhibitors. PDE5 inhibitors work in the erection  cascade. Basically, what happens, actually, let's  take it back to the nitric oxide thing and we'll get there. So nitric oxide essentially is released by the endothelium in response to a visual-tactile stimulating cue. Right? And so your body releases nitric oxide,  which then sets off the cascade for the erection. And so that releases c-GMP, which causes  the erection,  and it's degraded by phosphodiesterase. And so medications that inhibit  phosphodiesterase, like Viagra and Cialis, tend to prevent the breakdown of  that c-GMP, so you have longer-lasting erections. And so similarly these medications work  sort of similar to that. Some of them, we don't know exactly how  they work, but they work by increasing cGMP or cAMP that are involved in those  cascades.

**Andrew Huberman:** And what about  L-citrulline? I hear about L-citrulline used, it's an over-the-counter  supplement, and it's in the arginine pathway. And my understanding is that it works  similarly to things like Cialis, Viagra, but is perhaps not as potent. I also just — cautionary note out there,  L-citrulline can give people vicious cold sores and canker sores. Vicious. You hear about this on the internet. It's been verified by grotesque images  that you do not want to Google for, and not everyone tolerates it well.

## [00:52:20] L-Citrulline, Supplements

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So these actually work by  increasing nitric oxide. So they're not later down the pathway,  they're actually increasing the availability of nitric oxide. So L-arginine is the more direct pathway,  but it's very low bioavailability. L-citrulline converts to L-arginine, but  it lasts much longer in the bloodstream, which is why people tend to use  L-citrulline. Now, you know, in sexual medicine, these supplements, while there  has been some studies on them and they are effective, there's no regulation on the  supplement industry, so we can recommend them, but we just can't say that for sure  that the supplement is exactly what's said on the bottle. We see lots of studies where they'll say,  I read one about melatonin and there's a variation of melatonin from what's on the  bottle to 400% times more. And so that's kind of the struggle that we as medical doctors have. And I know we get a lot of slack for it,  that we don't talk about supplements, but it's really the challenge there is like  finding the quality supplements.

**Andrew Huberman:** A great site, which I  have no relationship to, except that I mention them all the time, is examine.com , which has references to human studies and where there's a lot of efficacy shown  and will get into some side effect. Can't address quality by brand issues, but thanks for mentioning that. What percentage of males who take Cialis,  aka tadalafil, or Viagra, for erectile dysfunction get relief from that? Because you mentioned only 3% of erectile  issues in males are hormonal in origin. But what percentage are likely to be  blood-flow related in origin?

## [00:54:09] Erectile Dysfunction & Cialis; Prostate Health; Females

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So a large percentage are  blood-flow related. That doesn't mean that the medication will be effective for everyone. If you look at the large percentage are  vascular in nature, right? That's the number one cause as men age. So we know that about 50% or 52% of men  over the age of 40 will have erectile dysfunction, and that continues to  increase as you age. So 50% of 50-year-olds, 60% of  60-year-olds, and so on and so forth. So it's very, very common. And the success rate in the studies is  about 60% to 70%. So when you give someone a medication, they will have sustained  erections that are sufficient for penetrative intercourse, which is the way  we kind of discuss erectile dysfunction in studies and with patients, is about 60%  to 70%. So not everyone will have success, but not all of that is because the medication doesn't work. Sometimes people are not taking them  correctly, sometimes people need to try different doses, and then there's still  this issue of your brain is still active, and so if you're having anxiety or you're  having other issues or stress in your life, that can have an effect on your  ability to create an erection. So there's lots of factors that go into  it, but generally speaking, they are effective and they do work quite well and  they're tolerated pretty well.

**Andrew Huberman:** Sixty percent to 70% is  not a small number. That's a significant number. That's the majority, but by a significant  margin. Is there a basis for the use of Cialis,  tadalafil, Viagra, L-citrulline in females?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, yeah, there's not a  lot of data on this, but certainly, if you have surmised that there is a blood-flow  issue and they're having difficulties with orgasm, it's certainly something you can  try off-label. And certainly people do try these medications off-label to see if  they improve sexual function for women. But there's not a whole bunch of robust,  randomized, controlled trial studies on women with these medications.

**Andrew Huberman:** A little bit later, we  will talk about prostate health specifically, but I'm just going to make a note here that nowadays there's increasing use of low-dosage Cialis/ tadalafil. So rather than, what I found online was  that the erectile dysfunction treatment dosage of Cialis/tadalafil is somewhere in the 15-to-20-mg range. What we're talking about here is daily use of 2.5 to 5 mg of Cialis/tadalafil for prostate health. And I learned in researching for this  episode that tadalafil/Cialis was actually developed as a drug for the treatment of  prostate health to essentially increase blood flow of the prostate, to increase  prostate health, not for the treatment of erectile dysfunction. So I found that to be somewhat  interesting, and a lot of people are now starting to use that. I also learned that if you dive into the  guts of the internet, one can find that now there's a growing use of combined  low-dosage Cialis and apomorphine, which is a prodopaminergic agent. And we'll get back to dopamine a little  bit later, but is there any basis for low dosage, say, 2.5 to 5 mg daily use of  Cialis/tadalafil  in females?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. Well, let's talk about it for males and  females. I think low-dose daily Cialis is excellent for erectile function in men, even---

**Andrew Huberman:** Is that true even, sorry  to interrupt, but is that true even for men that are not experiencing erectile  dysfunction?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** It's not indicated for  that purpose, but there's a thought that it's increasing blood flow to the area. So people, I've personally used it for men who have pelvic pain to help with increasing blood flow, you can also use it potentially as a preventative. So some people have kind of thought,  okay, it's increasing blood flow, it's preventing fibrosis of that erectile  tissue that can happen with age or other vascular problems, so it may be beneficial for that as well. Although, again, that's off-label and not  something that we generally promote. As far as for women, again, it can help  with blood flow. So if you're having issues, so if you have a female who's having sexual dysfunction and she's got signs of vascular problems,  like she's got diabetes, high blood pressure, she smokes, then yes, it's  certainly reasonable to try and see how they do. Usually you want to give at least a  four-week trial to see if there's any benefit with those medications.

**Andrew Huberman:** Great, thank you for that. Why is it that I get so many questions  about erectile dysfunction from males who are in their 20s and 30s? Because everything you said up until now  was mainly focused on men 40 years and older. Is it from lack of physical activity,  overuse of nicotine? By the way, vaping, as far as we know,  vaping and smoking, bad for erectile function and perhaps sexual health in  males and females generally. Because nicotine is a vasoconstrictor. Nicotine does have certain benefits, and I covered this in an episode on nicotine. Neurocognitive benefits in the elderly in  particular. But it is a vasoconstrictor, so it runs  against all of the sexual arousal stuff that we're talking about. But okay, let's assume that a male in  their 20s or 30s is sleeping enough, six to eight hours a night, is exercising,  isn't doing anything to punish their pelvic floor in the gym, and they're not  doing legs-crossed Kegels while doing crunches or something while inhaling on  the crunch. That was a quiz, by the way, folks. For earlier topics covered. Let's assume they're eating pretty well. The majority of their foods are coming  from nonprocessed or minimally processed foods. They're doing a little meditation each day. They're engaging in, hopefully healthy  relationships. They're not masturbating like crazy to  porn. And let's assume that they are not on any  SSRI, why are all these 20- and 30-year-olds on the internet  asking — mainly you, they mainly run to you — but also to my direct messages about their erectile issues?

## [00:58:58] Erectile Dysfunction in Young Men

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So I will say I have seen  a lot of young men in my clinic, and I will say that they very often have pelvic  floor dysfunction. So even though they're doing all the right things, we're in a stressful society. So you can try all the things to decrease  your stress. But a lot of us are sitting long periods  of time, especially during COVID I mean, people sat for months, right, years,  like, just sitting at their home computer. And so exercising one hour is not going to offset the day full of sitting. And so all of those things can affect  pelvic floor function. So my theory is that that's probably the  more common cause---

**Andrew Huberman:** So walk more.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** I've actually heard that ---

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Or use a standing desk.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah. Walk more. Standing desk. Okay, so, and then my guess is that  there's some psychogenic feedback loop.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely.

**Andrew Huberman:** Which is just nerdspeak  for things aren't working as well as they would like, then they're stressing about  it, and the stress is making things worse.

## [01:01:37] Pornography, Masturbation & Ejaculation; Healthy Sexual Behavior

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely. And you mentioned that people are not  masturbating or using porn, but a lot of people learn about sex through porn. Whether it's good or bad, it's not a great thing, but that's accessible now. When we were growing up, you had to find a VCR, you had to find a quiet room that no one was going to walk in.

**Andrew Huberman:** I'm old enough to  remember when the kid down the street, I won't mention him by last name, but,  yeah, the kid down the street had porno magazines.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, or magazines.

**Andrew Huberman:** And then there was  actually a library of these. Goodness I shouldn't say where they were. In the town I grew up in, where kids would stash them in specific locations in parking lots, and then boys would bike or  skateboard over or walk over, and then they would take turns looking at them. But that actually is to raise perhaps a  more important point, which is that looking at pornography is different than  masturbating to pornography, which is also different than masturbating to  pornography to the point of ejaculation. Right. Because I also get a lot of questions from people about their porn addiction issues. And there's a growing theory out there  that overuse that, meaning not just looking at but masturbating to pornography to the point of ejaculation, is creating a deficit of seeking out and cultivating  healthy, real-world sexual interactions.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah. So I want to start this before I get into  that is to say that if you're masturbating to porn and you have normal, healthy  relationships and you're going to work and you have a great partner, and  everything's great in your life, it's okay. Like, shame is a real problem, and---

**Andrew Huberman:** Maybe they're watching  pornography together.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah. So I think it's important, though, that at least in the literature, they don't describe porn addiction, they call it  problematic pornography use, and it's only described in about 4% of people in these  studies. So it's a small subset of people. I think it's becoming more common because  pornography is so accessible, and it activates the dopamine pathways just like  any other sort of addiction. Right. You watch pornography, you get a dopamine  response. Your brain then says, oh, I want that  again. And you keep seeking more novel, more  aggressive, different types of pornography to get that same response. But it doesn't happen to everybody.

**Andrew Huberman:** But also, I would say,  sorry to interrupt, but that the dopamine response, as a hardwired biological  mechanism, for adaptive behaviors, including, and let's just define healthy  sexual behavior, because I feel like there's such a range on that, depending on one's background, religious beliefs, et cetera. Anytime we talk about sex on this  podcast, I like to say that involves at least four things — obviously,  consensual, age appropriate, context appropriate, species appropriate.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes, absolutely. I'm really glad you brought that up. So I've heard you say that before, but  it's very important. I think there is a large spectrum of  people who watch pornography, ejaculate to pornography, and have a normal life, and  so that's fine. I think that if we shame those people,  we're creating problems. Right? We say, like, oh, you do that, that's  horrible. And then they're in their head. Right? And then they're causing problems in their life because of shame. And so I think there's a little bit of  cultural shame that comes of this discussion. And so it's a problem in the long term if  we say that, oh, this is going to create problems, because not everyone has,  there's so many people who watch pornography and have no problems. Who you know, have normal, healthy  relationships, great sex with their partner, and it's fine.

**Andrew Huberman:** Or they're between  relationships.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah

**Andrew Huberman:** And they're relying on  masturbation specifically.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Right.

**Andrew Huberman:** Are there any data that  distinguish between just pure imagination, fantasy versus visual fantasy as it relates to developing or inhibiting sexual health? And here we're talking about the desire  aspect. Let's assume physical arousal is handled,  no pun intended.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So I think that the thing  about young people, I wanted to get back to that, then I'll answer your question,  but the thing about young people who are watching pornography, that's what they  think sex is supposed to be like, they don't get an education about what sex is. Right. No one has a conversation with their kids  like, hey guys, this is what happens when you have sex, this is how long it should  take, this is what foreplay is. And this is not normal. This is a production. This is a produced product that's meant to arouse you. Right. And to give you ideally an ejaculation or  an orgasm. Right. So no one has that discussion. So then go to relationships like, why did  my partner not react like that woman did on the porno, right? Or why did I not react like that woman did on the porno?

**Andrew Huberman:** Or why didn't he react  like they would in porn? Because again, I think females are  watching porn as well.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Exactly. Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** So I think that you raise a really critical point, which is that the shame can extend both ways.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** And so I think to that  end, that's a problem. And because it's so accessible, I think we need to have conversations. I think it needs to be open, we have to  talk about sex. And that's kind of why I do what I do. We have to have these conversations so  people know what normal is.

**Andrew Huberman:** Thank you for that. I do think that people need to know what  normal is and what the range on normal is. Keeping the constraints that we talked  about place earlier, because I do think those are universal, healthy constraints.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Right.

**Andrew Huberman:** Consensual, age  appropriate, context appropriate, species appropriate. I'd like to take a quick break and  acknowledge our sponsor, Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better  understand your body and help you meet your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular  blood work done, for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your  immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. However, with a lot of blood tests out  there, you get information back about blood lipids, about hormones and so on,  but you don't know what to do with that information. With Inside Tracker, they have a  personalized platform that makes it very easy to understand your data, that is, to  understand what those lipids, what those hormone levels, et cetera mean, and  behavioral, supplement, nutrition and other protocols to adjust those numbers to bring them into the ranges that are ideal for your immediate and long-term health. Inside Tracker's ultimate plan now  includes measures of both APO B and of insulin, which are key indicators of  cardiovascular health and energy regulation. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you  can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman  to get 20% off. I asked whether or not imagined, pure  imagination-based arousal versus visual arousal. And for some people, the sounds of people  having sex is extremely arousing. If you've ever lived in a major city like  New York, which I've spent summers in, lot, you hear more often than you do in  areas where people are living further apart. You hear people having sex.

## [01:08:22] Arousal Habituation, Masturbation, Addiction

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** It's part of the auditory landscape.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes, you're very close  together. But yeah. So there's not exactly, at least to my  knowledge, I don't know of the data that looks at fantasy versus visual versus  auditory, but I will say that you can get habituated to certain things, and there is that data that maybe you can get habituated to watching a certain type of  thing to get aroused, and then normal things do not get you aroused, right? Like you may watch pornography and then  you may have difficulty getting aroused or turned on when you see your partner. You may get used to masturbating a certain way, right? So if you use certain vibratory  stimulation or certain pressure sensation every single time you masturbate, you can  get habituated to that, and you may not be able to replicate that during penetrative intercourse. And so I think that's really important. And I think the take-home is to try and  vary what you're doing. Masturbation is a fine, healthy way of  self-exploration. Again, with the caveat that as long as you're not masturbating to excess and avoiding your obligations or your family or your partners or your  friends, right, like you are just masturbating for the benefits of maybe  sleep improvement, mood boosting, reduction in anxiety. Those things are great. And so I think with that being said, you  just want to be thoughtful about varying it up.

**Andrew Huberman:** One of the issues with  masturbation that I've talked about when I was a guest on other podcasts, mainly in  the context of male masturbation and perhaps with pornography, perhaps not, is  that it's pretty clear, based on the data surrounding addiction, that anytime there  are big increases in dopamine without a lot of effort required to generate that  dopamine, like turning on pornography on the internet versus asking someone out on  a date, going out on a date. You know again, we're talking about going  through the conversations and the mating ritual, that is the human mating ritual,  that, of course, in the context of healthy interactions involves getting mutual  consent and these kinds of things, right. That you could imagine how, without  placing any moral judgment on it, without shaming anybody, you could imagine that if somebody exclusively masturbated and didn't develop the skills of courtship and building healthy sexual relationships, that pornography and or masturbation could start to create, quote, unquote, problems, right. Whereby somebody only felt comfortable in  those domains. And I think that's what I'm hearing more  and more about when, it seems to be young men reach out.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely. And I think it's definitely the ease of  access. Right. But I think that's pervasive in the young  society now. Like, you don't have to actually go and  find a mate. You can just go on an app and look for  somebody. Right?

**Andrew Huberman:** That's a form of finding  a mate. I mean, I was weaned in the era when no  smartphones or anything.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** No, my point is, I think  that we've become very connected to technology in our world, which also means  that we're having less conversations. The younger generation is having less  conversations and more online conversations. And I think that's a skill that needs to  be developed as well and I think part of that is contributing to all this as well.

**Andrew Huberman:** Well, one thing that I  can attest to, is that I grew up in a community of mostly male friends. I have female friends, always have. Where a lot of what we learned about sex  came from older, my case, guys. My sister probably learned a lot about sex from her female friends. And there was always that one guy who  would just say stuff that years later I realized was incredibly misleading. Maybe even just detrimental. And I just want to remind people that when you are on Reddit or anywhere on the internet and there's people saying things  with certainty, they might be that guy.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** Right. Absolutely. And if I look at the long arc of those  people, that guy's life, it didn't speak to tremendous success in the domain for  which they were asserting such confidence. Let me put it that way. Okay. I'd like to slightly pivot to a different  aspect of this conversation because it's just really critical, which is the female  sexual response. This is something that does not get enough discussion.

## [01:12:57] Female Arousal Response, Orgasm, Coolidge Effect

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely.

**Andrew Huberman:** And there's a lot of  stereotypes, Right. The stereotype that we hear about is, oh,  they need more foreplay, which can be true. Some cases is not true. The stereotype is that women are more  intimacy and relationship based in their sexual response. That can be true. I have female friends and have known women who also are just really interested in having sex for sex sake at times, or maybe all the time. I think, I like to think that we are past  the stage of human development where the stereotypes around this are fixed. Right.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** And we hear more about  this and we see more about this now. But what is the real deal around the  female arousal response? And then we will talk about female orgasm  response. And there, I'm just going to earmark now  that anytime we say something like arousal or orgasm, there are multiple forms of  that, and we will talk about the multiple forms of female orgasm.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah. So if you talk about the response cycle,  you can go back to the research of Masters and Johnson. And so what they did, this was way back  when, and they actually watched sex workers have sex. And this was, I guess, okay, back then.

**Andrew Huberman:** Female sex workers,

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, with men. So they watched, and they took note of the steps of the female arousal or sexual response. And so the first phase is excitement. Right. And during that phase, your heart rate  goes up, you're breathing a little heavier. There is this sex flush, you can see  redness in areas like in the vulva, in the breast, I mean in the nipples. And then you go to... and that can last a  variety of different times. You'll also start seeing some lubrication  vaginally. Right. And then the plateau response is when that is kind of at its peak, and it kind of stays steady, and then you reach orgasm. And so orgasm essentially is a response of the body where you will have, again, increased sympathetic response, and you  will have pelvic floor muscle contractions, which are rhythmic, about  0.8 seconds or so, you're having a rhythmic pelvic floor contraction along  with the sensation of orgasm. And then you'll have your recovery  period, which you talked about briefly earlier, which can have sort of a  refractory time period, at which point you can no longer orgasm again, if you'd like to. Or for men, obtain another erection again  for a short period of time. And that can be kind of an absolute  refractory period, so where it's definitely not happening, and then a  relative refractory period where you need something more novel and exciting to then  again, resume that cycle again.

**Andrew Huberman:** The Coolidge effect.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** I've talked about the  Coolidge effect before on this podcast. I'll just cue people to a timestamp link  in the show note caption so we don't go down the path. But one thing that's really important to  understand is that the Coolidge effect is present in both males and females, meaning if a male ejaculates and is of the feeling that they can't have another  erection for some period of time, the presentation of a novel, I guess we should say partner, because we could be talking about homosexual relationship here, not  just heterosexual. But a novel sexual partner, female or  male, depending on their proclivities, can override the refractory period and they  can have another erection and ejaculation. Similarly, a female will have a  postorgasmic refractory period. If they are given an adequate stimulus,  something arousing enough, they can experience arousal and orgasm again. And we know, based on really good  pharmacology, that this is a dopamine-driven thing. The prolactin is essentially establishing  the refractory period, and the dopamine is essentially overriding the refractory  period. Fascinating neurochemistry there. And speaks to the incredible extent to  which the brain is controlling the genitals.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, we always say in  sexual medicine that the brain is the most powerful organ for sex. Not your genitals, but the brain. Because it is so powerful, and I'm not  sure if we're going to touch on this later, but I'll bring it up now, there are some centrally acting medications now available for, they're FDA-approved for  premenopausal women with low libido.

## [01:17:22] Priapism, Melanocyte Stimulating Hormone; Women & Low Libido Medications

**Andrew Huberman:** Oh, maybe just throw  those out because the one that I'm aware of that's often used in, let's say, niche  cultures is melanocyte-stimulating hormone in men, which gives people a tan, makes  them erect. That melanocyte-stimulating hormone, MSH,  comes from the medial pituitary, if I'm not mistaken. One of those weird regions — everyone  talks about, anterior, posterior. And people are now injecting this as a  peptide. It can cause priapism. I have not had that experience. I've never tried this MSH, but I'm told  that if people are getting cavalier with it, they can have issues. A priapism being enduring and perhaps even final erection. Is that true?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, a priapism---

**Andrew Huberman:** Priapism I mean, it's actually from Priapus, the  Greek god who's often photographed with a really big erection. Oh, wow. We didn't hear enough about that Greek god in school.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Is it Roman? Roman or Greek? But anyways.

**Andrew Huberman:** Either way.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** It's an erection that  lasts longer than four hours. And it is actually a surgical or, it's not a surgical, but it's actually an emergency. If you have an erection that lasts longer  than four hours in the absence of sexual arousal, then it is important to get to an emergency room because at that point you can start developing decreased blood flow  and ultimately changes to the actual tissues, scarring, fibrosis. So it's really important to actually go to the emergency room. Don't wait because you're embarrassed. Really get there and get treated.

**Andrew Huberman:** However, if I'm not  mistaken, earlier you mentioned that it is exceedingly rare that people who take  Cialis/tadalafil or Viagra for erections are getting true priapism.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct. And it's mostly from those injectables we  talked about earlier, those intracavernosal injections. People can get priapism from those, a  little bit more commonly. And so that's something we always counsel  on. And also certain medications like  trazodone, or if you have sickle cell anemia, those are the most common reasons  that we see people coming in with priapism.

**Andrew Huberman:** Really? Okay. I'm going to refrain from my desire to  figure out that one so I don't take us down a rabbit hole here.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Sorry, I wanted to get  back to the MSH. There is actually an FDA-approved  medication called bremelanotide is the brand name. Vyleesi is the, sorry bremelanotide is a  generic name, Vyleesi is the brand name, which is FDA-approved for women with low  desire. Hypoactive sexual desire disorder,  premenopausal women. Premenopausal because that's what they  studied. But it is basically the same peptide. Right. So it is a melanocortin receptor agonist,  and it works on the brain pathways to increase desire. It's taken as an injectable, again, just  like you said, about an hour, 45 minutes before, when you want to want, you take it 45 minutes before. And it works quite effectively in  increasing desire.

**Andrew Huberman:** How long does it last?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** About 24 hours. Some people maybe up to 48.

**Andrew Huberman:** Has it been? I mean, I know of men using  melanocyte-stimulating hormone peptides. I also really want to caution people about obtaining gray market peptides. Sorry for this insertion here, but there  are a lot of peptides available without a prescription on the internet. They are almost all contaminated with  something called LPS, lipolysaccharide, which is not something you want to be  injecting a lot over time. That's actually how we induce an immune  response in animals in the laboratory. And it is amazing to me how many websites  are selling this stuff, and it arrives to you easily. You just buy it on the internet. It says not for human or animal use, and  people are injecting it. And the LPS issue is something I think is  potentially going to shut down that whole market at some point. But if you are interested in using a  peptide, you should be obtaining it by a prescription from a quality physician.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Exactly. And because we have bremelanotide, we can  prescribe that for men as well. So sometimes we'll do it off-label for men who are having delayed ejaculation because it will help them achieve orgasm a little bit better. So, you know, this is available for  premenopausal women. The other medication that's available for  low libido is called flibanserin, also known as Addyi is the brand name, and that also works on serotonin. It's got kind of a mixed response,  serotonin and dopaminergic areas of the brain, and essentially works as a daily  medication taken before bedtime, 100 milligrams a day, that actually helps with decreasing hypoactive sexual desire disorder. Works in about 45% to 60% of patients, and you need to take it for some time. Now, both of these are brand name  medications, so they are a little bit costly, and sometimes insurance doesn't  cover them, but they are available, and I think very few people know about them, and I think they're really great and useful tools in the toolbox.

**Andrew Huberman:** And these are for desire?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. They're FDA approved for what we call  hypoactive sexual desire disorder, which is essentially low libido that causes  distress and bother.

## [01:22:25] Libido & Individuality

**Andrew Huberman:** I don't want to take us  off course about vaginal lubrication, arousal, and female orgasm, but as long as we're talking about arousal and reduced arousal, that requires treatment, I have  to ask this now. Anytime we talk about arousal and libido,  there's no BMI, which, by the way, the body mass index is probably not the best  tool either. But there's no chart. It's not like a thermometer that says  you're 98.6 plus or minus 2 degrees, you're good. If it's too high, much higher than that,  you have a fever. If much lower than that, you're  hypothermic. So my understanding, I don't want to say  naive understanding, but my understanding is that one determines whether or not  their libido is normal, high or low, largely based on some intuitive  understanding of what their partner or partner's desire, whether or not they can  meet those desires, and if they sort of accrue enough of a sample size, they date  enough people where they have sexual interactions, they figure out over time  whether or not they have a low, medium, or high sex drive. And people tend to compare to how they  felt in earlier years or at different times of the year or under different  psychological conditions and stress conditions, that kind of thing. But we really don't have a benchmark for  this, right? I mean, we can't say that, for instance,  that if people are not desiring sex or thinking about sex with blank frequency,  that they have low libido. Right. It's sort of what is working or not  working for you in the context of your life.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Right.

**Andrew Huberman:** Is that a reasonable way  to think about it?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** There's no right or wrong. Basically, what you're saying, there's no  right or wrong amount of libido. There's many people who identify as  asexual and they are happy with that. There are people who like to have sex once a month and they're happy with that. It really is a matter of distress. Are you bothered by it? So when we look at studies for female  sexual dysfunction, using validated questionnaires like the FSFI, you can  actually see that about 40% of people qualify for having sexual dysfunction. But really bother is only seen in about 12 %. And you can be bothered because you're bothered, you can be bothered because your partner is bothered, but it's really up to you. Right. Like, if you feel like there's something  that you want to improve on, then that's when you go see your doctor. But there's no right or wrong answer. Right. This is very subjective and a lot of times we'll see couples who have mismatched libidos. Now, does that mean one person's right and one person is wrong? No, it's just a matter of like, well, if  you want to come to a point where you agree, how do we get there? And what is your end goal?

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah. Later we'll talk a little bit more about  chemistry, which I find infinitely fascinating, because in my life  experience, I've just been struck by the fact that occasionally you have a physical interaction with someone, or sometimes it's not even physical interaction, and  they are just so unbelievably arousing to you or somewhere in between, or sometimes  it just sort of ain't there, or it's just not there that much, or nobody likes to  talk about this, or it's there until you sleep together and then it's not there. And this is not just put on males, this is put on females. I hope she doesn't kill me for saying this. I know somebody who is a family member,  who once said, sometimes you have to realize you never want to sleep with  somebody again by sleeping with them. And here we're not talking about traumatic experience.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Right. Right.

**Andrew Huberman:** So, again, the discussion around libido, as you so aptly pointed out, engaging what is healthy levels of  libido has a lot to do with what oneself desires as well as the hopes and  expectations of the people that we are sexually involved with. So we'll get back to that a little bit  later in the context of chemistry, because I find it so fascinating, and it's  something that isn't talked about enough. But thank you for that. Let's get back to female sexual arousal  response and orgasm.

## [01:26:18] Female Arousal, Vaginal Lubrication; Discharge, Odors & Douching

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, physiologically, what  happens to the body is it prepares for penetration. Now, that could be a penis, that could be  a sex toy, that could be a digit — finger , to be more specific. So what it does is the cervix moves up and out of the way. The inner one third, two thirds of the  vagina lengthens and elongates to allow for penetration, and it can actually  nearly double in size of the baseline vaginal length. And so it is preparing for that. That's part of it. In some people who have painful  intercourse, it's because they haven't had adequate time for arousal. And so the penis is penetrating before  they've had those adaptations to occur. And also the labia open up to allow for  that penetration. So these things actually happen  physiologically to allow for preparation. So while some people may be aroused and  get to that point quicker, some people do need a longer period of time of what, as  you described, foreplay. And not everyone is the same, but I think  it's important to have that discussion with your partner, and you know  lubrication is one of the ways that people assess arousal, but that's not the be all end all. Some people just make a lot of  lubrication, and some people don't. And certainly that changes with age and  hormones. So certainly we know that after  menopause, with a drop in estrogen and testosterone, you will see a decrease in  lubrication. And sometimes, if people are on  medications that can alter their hormonal axis, they may also see changes in  lubrication after, during breastfeeding, you can see changes in lubrication, and  again, they're not aroused necessarily, this is like a physiologic problem that  they're having.

**Andrew Huberman:** Can we distinguish  between arousal-based lubrication, let's say sexual arousal-based lubrication? And again, folks, forgive me for being so  hyper-specific in language, but there are other forms of arousal besides sexual  arousal that we know from, it's not a pleasant topic from reports following  sexual assault, that, you know, oftentimes the victim is demonized for having been  lubricated. And they will say, well, then people will  presume that somehow they wanted that interaction, and that's not true in those  cases, it's clear that the lubrication occurred independent of libido type  arousal.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Exactly right.

**Andrew Huberman:** Okay, so let's set that  aside again, unpleasant topic, but one that's important to flag. Are there forms of non-libido type arousal lubrication that allow for nonpainful or even pleasureful penetration that are  important to distinguish from the arousal-based lubrication? In other words, I have to imagine that  women will have sex and it can be pleasureful or at least not painful, and  that might relate in some way to baseline levels of lubrication. And here we've been talking about  lubrication mainly in the context of arousal, you know, postmenopausal  reductions in lubrication, but are there also postmenopausal reductions in baseline lubrication? Are some people's vaginas just more  lubricated? I want to say at rest. It's like a scientist in me. When they're asleep, for instance, I  mean, men are having erections in their sleep. Are women getting vaginal lubrications in  their sleep periodically? My guess is yes.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Well, they're definitely  getting clitoral engorgement, right? They're getting clitoral engorgement. There's been some studies on that, that  they are also getting nocturnal tumescence, right? Just like men do. As far as lubrication, the data, at least  from what I understand, is, like, there is a protective mechanism whereby women,  when there's any sense that there may be penetration, that their body will  immediately start creating lubrication, and that is protective to avoid trauma and injury. There's also baseline vaginal discharge. That's completely normal. Women will make physiologic discharge. In fact, in our examinations, when we  examine, women will say normal physiologic discharge because we see it, there's  always discharge, and it can be up to, like, 5 milliliters. So it's not a small amount, it can be  quite a lot.

**Andrew Huberman:** And it's menstrual cycle  dependent in terms of the viscosity.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. It changes over the cycle, and it can be  different in color and different in thickness, and that's completely normal. And I think that's a real problem in the  feminine hygiene industry. You don't need to smell a certain way or  reduce that discharge, this is, like completely normal, healthy. And you talked about chemistry, and I know there's not a ton of data on this, but there's, like, pheromones, right? There's scents that are coming from you  which are actually attractive to a partner, potentially, and in whatever  physiologic. I don't know, there's not a lot of ton of  data on this, but there is that part of it. So there's a lot of marketing towards  women that you're dirty, you should be smelling like peaches or whatever.

**Andrew Huberman:** Really?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** There's a lot of marketing.

**Andrew Huberman:** Maybe this is a  generational thing, but I learned early on, I think, my behavioral neuroscience  courses, that vaginal lubrications were part of the arousal response for both. These were always framed in the context of heterosexual relationships. But both partners, let's just say both  partners, because this could be a homosexual female relationship, too. Right. We want to make the conversation as broad  as possible, and that the odor, let's just be frank here, the odor and the taste  played a role in both arousal, but also the pair bonding response that would  establish future arousal. And anyone that's ever been in a  relationship that, let's say, had healthy sexual relations, I like to think has  experienced remembering somebody's smell or thinking about somebody's smell, and  that itself could be very arousing.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes.

**Andrew Huberman:** Partners even smelling  different articles of each other's clothing and that being arousing. So, I mean, this is the stuff of real  physiology. We're not making this stuff up.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Right. But there is. There is a lot of marketing towards women  that they should use douching or other things to clean themselves, and it's  damaging. Right. It's actually, one it can affect the  vaginal microbiome. So their pH is changing, and that can  affect their risk for UTIs or bacterial vaginosis. And so they're buying these, spending  their money on these things because they're being told that they're not clean. And they come to the doctor saying, oh, I  think I have an STD, but it's like normal physiologic discharge. And so I think it's important to say that  this is normal, and it's normal to have an odor that is distinct to you, and that  there's, of course, if you have, like, a fishy odor, that may be a sign of, like, a very strong, new, novel odor that wasn't there before, that may be a sign of a  sexually transmitted infection. But if it's your general odor that you've  always had, that's normal.

## [01:33:09] Vaginal Infections, Discharge; Vaginal Microbiome

**Andrew Huberman:** And what about other  infections, like yeast infections or bacterial infections? I got a number of questions about  mycoplasma infections, which we don't hear that often about.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah. So you can see if your discharge has  changed and become more like cottage cheese like. Or there's other symptoms, like itching or discomfort, then those are signs to go get evaluated. Mycoplasma is another infection that we  see in the vagina, but we also actually sometimes see in the urine. And while it's not something we routinely  test for, when we have people who have symptoms of urinary tract infection and  they're not improving, sometimes we will check for mycoplasma that could be causing symptoms in the urethra itself.

**Andrew Huberman:** We've had a couple  episodes about the gut microbiome. My colleague Justin Sonnenburg at  Stanford, his laboratory is directly above from mine, is an expert in the gut  microbiome. I've done a couple episodes about this,  and he reminded me, and I like to remind people, that every mucosal lining of your  body has a robust microbiome. So that means intranasal, intravaginal,  intraurethral in males and females, there's an anal microbiome. There's a microbiome on your skin, on your eyes. And you mentioned douching and other ways  of, I don't want to say quote, unquote, cleaning it. Because that language falls in line with  the idea that it's a good thing. You're telling me it's a bad thing in many cases, because it's wiping out the microbiome. What are some of the things that females  can do in order to promote the health of their vaginal microbiome?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, it's really, our  bodies are amazing. The vagina is a self-cleaning oven. You don't have to do anything. You just wash.

**Andrew Huberman:** I love that. The vagina is a self-cleaning oven. I'm not going to repeat that too often in  too many different contexts, but I'm going to remember it forever.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** You will. You will. And so all you need to do is wash the  hair-bearing areas, because those are the ones that create sweat and should be  cleaned. But other than that, let soapy water run  down. You don't need to do anything. Your body will take care of it itself.

**Andrew Huberman:** When I was five years  old, I pulled my parents in the bathroom and I said, they still talk about this? I said, I want to know everything about  sex. I want to know everything. And they were like, oh, my God, what are  we dealing with? And I'll never forget, my dad just looked  at me, he's Argentinian and he said, just remember, kids are the one thing in life  you can't give back. That's all he said. That was it.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** That's it.

**Andrew Huberman:** That was it.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Oh, gosh. Well, I will tell you, my discussions with my sons are, my son, my older son has been much more graphic than that. I tell him---

**Andrew Huberman:** Amazing.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** Amazing. Well, I went out into the world and,  anyway.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** You figured it out.

**Andrew Huberman:** Let's spend a few minutes or more talking about female orgasm. One of the more cryptic topics on the  internet, not because it isn't discussed, but because I think that the nuance of it  isn't discussed often enough or in full depth. So let's take the time we need to parse  this. I think that the simplest way to parse it  is going to be, from the anatomical standpoint, clitoral orgasm versus so  called G-spot, or penetration-based orgasm. But of course, penetration-based orgasm is also a bit of a misnomer because there can be clitoral stimulation by pelvic  pressure or by digit. We're talking about fingers as digits,  because we're both in the medical science profession, but we're talking about  fingers here or something else. Right. Vibrator, toy, whatever. Toe, for it, depends on how flexible you  are. I don't know. But the point being that I think the  simplest way to go about this is going to be to talk about the distinction between  clitoral orgasm and G-spot orgasm, however those are achieved, and to also talk  about this idea of graded versus absolute. Okay, so this has actual parallels to  neuroscience, where we talk about communication between neurons being graded. Meaning it's kind of one level, then a  higher level, then a lower level, or all or none. Right? How shall I say this? It is clear in my life experience and  observation that there are multiple kinds of female orgasm. Those that are graded and in some cases  cumulative, they sort of build towards a larger and larger orgasm. And then there are what some people have  described as cliff-type orgasms, where there's a refractory period. I think that's a fair way to frame this. And clearly, there are different responses to the orgasm response. Some people get sleepy, some people get  energized. Some people, it heightens their desire for more. Some people, they need a period of time in which they become hypersensitive to touch. So lots of different things going on there. Psychologically, physiologically. Yeah, tell us all of it.

## [01:35:45] Female Orgasm, Vaginal Penetration, Stimulation, Clitoris, G-Spot

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, in terms of orgasm,  right, I think it's important to distinguish that there is orgasm and then  there's different areas that you stimulate to achieve orgasm. So some people will stimulate... The  clitoris is probably the most reliable form of stimulation that will achieve  orgasm. And when you look at the data, and again,  female sexual dysfunction data is not super robust, but what we find is that  about 85% of women require clitoral stimulation in order to climax. So very few actually climax through just  vaginal penetration alone. This is a real problem we're seeing on the media that you have sex and you penetrate, and immediately women are  having orgasms. That's not the reality for a lot of  women, and in terms of stimulation, so like we've talked about throughout this  podcast, the clitoris is the homologue of the penis, or the penis is the homologue  of the clitoris, however you want to say it.

**Andrew Huberman:** Good on you for getting  it both directions.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** I probably would have  screwed that one up.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So clitoral stimulation is just like penile stimulation — for women that is very reliable. And there's a huge orgasm gap. For men, it's pretty consistent that when  they have a first-time sexual encounter, 95% of men are having an orgasm. When you look at first-time sexual  encounters for women, with, in heterosexual relationships, it's about 45 % to 50% are having an orgasm. And when you look at homosexual  relationships of women, it's again 90%. So there's clearly some lacking in---

**Andrew Huberman:** Ninety percent of female  homosexual interactions that are first-time interactions, 90% are having  orgasm.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct.

**Andrew Huberman:** Presumably because they  understand the anatomy of other by way of understanding the anatomy of self.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So there's a huge gap.

**Andrew Huberman:** And physiology and  psychology of that, too.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** But you know there's a  huge gap there. And so I think to bring it home is that  clitoral stimulation is the most reliable way. And as you mentioned, when you're  stimulating vaginally, you're often, the clitoris is like a wishbone, and it goes  around the vagina. And so you're often stimulating the crura  is what we call the legs, I guess, for lack of a better term, of the clitoris. And so you're stimulating that. You're also stimulating the clitoral  shaft, which goes deep into the pelvis. The G-spot is an area, it's an erogenous  zone where it's kind of in the anterior wall of the vagina, about 2 to 3 cm in. That's the location of these periurethral  glands called the Skene's glands. And they are analogous or homologous to  the male prostate. So just like some men have prostate play  and enjoy pleasure from prostate stimulation, some women enjoy G-spot  stimulation. Now, that's not universal, right? Not all men enjoy prostate play, and not  all women are going to be aroused by G-spot stimulation. And so I think there's a huge variety of  ways you can stimulate anyone. It can be man or woman. Some people will have orgasms through just nipple stimulation alone. Some will just hear something or see  something and be able to achieve an orgasm. And it's so varied from person to person. And I think that the big take-home from  this for people listening is like, you have to talk to your partner. And this is the hardest thing, we never  learned how to talk about sex. Like, what do you like? What do you not like? And don't take it personally. Right. I think a lot of times people feel like  you have to orgasm to have pleasure, which may not be the case for everybody. And if it is, how do you prioritize that  for your relationship? So, I don't know if I got off track  there, but that's kind of, I think the take-homes for this and also the vaginal  penetration. It's actually usually from cervical  stimulation, not necessarily vaginal, because the large density of innervation  of the vagina is in the first outer third of the vagina. The deeper two-thirds of the vagina has  much less innervation.

**Andrew Huberman:** And yet there is such a  thing as cervical orgasm. And the cervix being further up the  vaginal canal is cervical orgasm. Specifically, the foci of an orgasm that  starts in the back of the vagina. Is that.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah. So it's from stimulation of the cervix  through whatever means. Right. And that can be pleasurable and lead to  orgasm. And again, orgasm is defined differently,  but the one thing we know is that there are pelvic floor contractions, which are  measurable. So you can kind of tell that your partner  is having an orgasm if you have a female partner, because you can actually feel  those contractions. Right. Whether it's on your digit or your organ  or a sex toy.

**Andrew Huberman:** Okay, super nerdy  question here. Years ago, when I worked on hormone-based  sexual differentiation, which, by the way, we've done an episode of the podcast  on previously, I learned that the levator ani muscle is the muscle that controls  erection in males, and presumably clitoral tumescence and engorgement in females. Is there an equivalent muscle responsible  for the orgasm response? Or is the contraction of the pelvic floor  part of a more general theme of muscular contraction and a bunch of different nerve roots contracting. The reason I ask this is that eventually,  in this conversation, we're going to migrate up toward the brain. But because this is a science and health  podcast, when we talk about orgasm, of course many people recognize that as their experience of it and their recognition of it in other people and descriptions, et  cetera. But are we talking about a response that  originates at a foci, kind of like in the brain? We talk about a seizure starting at a  focus, a foci, and then spreading out? Or are we talking about a bunch of  different nerve roots and brain centers firing in synchrony and that's why some  people experience it as behind their forehead and in their genitals.

## [01:42:31] Erection & Orgasm, Pelvic Floor Muscles

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** Or as a whole-body  response. And here we're not talking about the flood of neurochemicals into the body, I'm talking about during those moments of  orgasm. What is happening neurally? I mean, it does have certain parallels to  seizure, right?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** It does. It does. So let me go back to your first part of  the question, which was about orgasm and, sorry, erection and tumescence being  related to levator ani. So actually, what happens during... the  reason you get an erection, and presumably clitoral stimulation the same way, is  blood flows into the erectile tissue and the tunica, which is the outer layers of  the erectile tissue, which are two basically cylindrical-shaped structures in the penis and in the clitoris. They will fill with blood, and then that  tunica will compress veins on the outside to prevent blood flow from leaving. So it's not a muscular event, it's an  actual blood flow event.

**Andrew Huberman:** Then how come when we  wanted to study erection behavior in rodents, we would give them injections of  testosterone, females or males, and observe changes in sexual behavior  accordingly? Erection and clitoral tumescence. Although it's harder to measure in  rodents, there's a way of indirectly measuring that. And then we would measure the size and  weight of the levitor ani muscles as a readout of how androgenized that whole  system was.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So the muscles---

**Andrew Huberman:** In other words, what is  the role of the levator ani in the sexual response?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So the levator ani---

**Andrew Huberman:** Well, you would know.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So those muscles are part  of the pelvic floor, right? And so those contract when you climax. Right. So whether it's orgasm for male or  female, they're contracting and they're exercising. Right? So that's how they would increase their  strength or their density, if you're measuring that through the actual climax,  of which you can't see in rodents. Right? So, like, you're kind of using it as a  surrogate in that way. So that's what happens. Those muscles contract as a response, and  climax is a brain-initiated event. Orgasm is a brain-initiated event. So that's why, to answer your second  part, you obviously feel focal response, but you also can feel a variety of  responses because it's all coming from the brain. It's not kind of the way you described it  as, like a ripple effect. It's more of like, it's the way your body  responds to that particular stimuli. And it's actually like the ultimate form  of mindfulness. You can't think of anything else when  you're orgasming. Right. So it's like you have this moment of  clarity and everything. You are very present in that moment. And so people will feel different  stimulations depending on how their nerves are, their sensations are, and things  like that.

**Andrew Huberman:** It's perhaps a good time  to mention dopamine. We've talked about it a few times earlier  when talking about the arousal arc that starts with parasympathetic sort of calm  and then move, typically starts as calm and then moves to the orgasm response. We know that the orgasm response is  associated with release of dopamine and then prolactin, which sets up the relative or absolute refractory period. The interesting thing, and I got some  questions about this, is that there's literature, as I understand, about the  elevation in dopamine caused by, say, antidepressants like Wellbutrin,  bupropion, which increases dopamine and norepinephrine. People who recreationally use drugs like  cocaine or other stimulants, people who take Adderall, Vyvanse, or other drugs  that increase levels of dopamine. Because I did whole episode about those  drugs, and they are different forms of amphetamine, unless we're talking about  Ritalin, which is a little bit different. And I got a lot of questions about people  who experience feeling a lot of desire, sort of arousal, but not being able to  achieve the physical arousal, erection or vaginal lubrication. So it's almost as if they're sitting  further along that arousal arc. Hence the importance, I think, of people  learning to have calm states of mind when going into sexual interactions. Now, I realize that in saying that, it  might be confusing, because a lot of people think, well, that's anything but  calm, right? Sexual arousal is anything but calm, but  maintaining enough calm that they can ride that arc for whatever duration is  appropriate for that interaction in them. Right. Because, again, and we should probably get back to this, some people will have sex for long periods of time, some for shorter periods of time. And here, people don't really know what  other people are doing, except by way of pornography and self-report and discussion. So is it the case that drugs that increase dopamine can inhibit the sexual response? Do they tend to promote the sexual  response? Because I also mentioned earlier, there's  this growing trend of people taking, by way of prescription, of course, from a  physician, combined apomorphine, which is a dopaminergic drug, with tadalafil, which is a PDE5 inhibitor, so it's going to increase blood flow. And I'm hearing about men and women, but  mainly men doing this. So ramping up their dopamine, ramping up  their blood flow to their genitals in order to have, presumably, more arousal  and sex. Does that make sense as a mechanism?

## [01:46:32] Dopamine-Enhancing Medication & Arousal Arc

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. So in terms of apomorphine, that has been  studied, and it's mostly been approved outside of the United States. So we don't use it very often here in the  United States because it hasn't been FDA approved. But it's a very complex response. So, like I mentioned, that flibanserin,  which is a centrally acting medication, it actually has not only stimulatory but  also inhibitory effects on dopamine. So the way it sort of works to enhance  interest or libido is sort of complex and kind of confusing. When it was actually approved, it was  being studied for an antidepressant, and what they found was that women were  actually having better interest in sex or more interest in sex. And so that's kind of how it was  discovered. Similarly, Viagra was actually studied for high blood pressure. And when they went to, it was horrible  blood pressure medication, but then the men who took it actually didn't return the samples for the study, so they realized, like, what's going on here? And it was because they were having better erections.

**Andrew Huberman:** Is it true that at some  urology meeting that the first description of Viagra as a treatment for erectile  dysfunction involved the speaker actually coming out from behind the podium and  revealing his erection? Is that a true story?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. I don't think it was Viagra. I think it was an intracavernosal  injection, though. I think he came out, it is a true story,  there's actually a published article, I'll send it to you so you can share it if  you'd like.

**Andrew Huberman:** I'm not sure I want to  see it, but I'll read the article.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** There's a published  article about people who were attending at the meeting. And, yes, he came out, and at the time, it was mostly men in urology, but there were, like, spouses, I guess, in the  audience, which is not typical now. So there were women in the audience, and  he came out with a full-on erection to show that it worked.

**Andrew Huberman:** Well, I suppose at the  Urology meeting or OB-GYN meeting, where a woman comes out and reveals her enhanced  vaginal lubrication, then we will have gender and sex balance at the meetings on  urology. It'll be interesting to attend one of  those someday. Differences in arousal as a function of  stage of the menstrual cycle. Really interested in this. I did a long episode on fertility and  we're going to have a few other IVF experts, fertility experts on the podcast. But, clearly, there are differences in  hormones across the menstrual cycle. We know that for sure. Clearly there can be psychological  variation according to those hormones for probably other things across the menstrual cycle. And it's always an imperfect experiment  because we aren't laboratory rats and people are having different interactions  across the menstrual cycle. Is there any known correlation between  desire and stage of the menstrual cycle? There are some obvious assumptions that  one might make: prior to ovulation, et cetera, around the time of ovulation. But what about the other direction, too? Is there a category of women that are very interested in sex at certain stages of their menstrual cycle and then not at all  interested in sex at other stages of the menstrual cycle?

## [01:51:18] Menstrual Cycle & Libido

**Dr. Rena Malik:** You know, all, the data  that I've heard, and maybe a gynecologist could speak more on this because they  study those variations a little better. But there is data to suggest that libido  does increase prior to ovulation and during ovulation, I think it's like a  couple of days prior, because that's the optimal time for fertility. So, yes, there is data to suggest that. In terms of completely lack of interest, I don't believe there's data, but I'm not sure.

## [01:52:49] Vaginal Penetration, Variation & Communication

**Andrew Huberman:** Is there evidence that  females who perhaps have not experienced so called G-spot orgasm or cervical orgasm can learn to do that? And I always find it interesting that  whenever there's a discussion about different forms of female orgasm, people  are careful to point out that many women don't have penetration-based orgasm, and  then they separate out clitoral stimulation as a more common route to  orgasm. But of course, there can be clitoral  stimulation with penetration.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely.

**Andrew Huberman:** Right. And depending on the physical  arrangement, there can be clitoral stimulation purely by way of penetration  through pelvic contact, fingers, et cetera. How should we think about this? How should we talk about it?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So there was an  interesting study that I just read recently where they gave women words for  these things, right? So there's like the rocking stimulation. So that can also stimulate. So, meaning that you're penetrating, but  there's like a rocking motion that can also penetrate the clitoris. There's stimulation of just the outer part of the vagina, which, again, as I mentioned, the G-spot is there, it's more  highly innervated, so that can be more stimulating. There's also ways to align yourself so  that when you're penetrating, you're putting pressure on the clitoris, and then there's stimulation with actual stimulation of the clitoris, like  intentional stimulation either by yourself or by the partner. And so there are multiple different ways  to do that. Right. And so I think that it's important to  really kind of, it's okay to explore and not always be a home run. And I think that's like when you get into  a relationship where you're maybe second, third, fourth time having intercourse with someone, that you can try and explore these different things or if the partner  themselves knows what they like to actually tell the other partner. Right. There's a huge part of communication that  I think plays a huge role in this because we know ourselves better than anyone else. So you can tell your partner what you like. And I think that we have never been taught how to do that.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah. Such important conversations for so many  reasons. And as you point out, definitely not  something they teach people in school, except they might say something about  communication is important. And that almost always circles back to the key four things we talked about earlier, which is that consent and age-appropriate , context-appropriate, these kinds of things. And obviously, substances like alcohol and other drugs can strongly confound those issues, and so we'll just leave that as a  kind of an obvious one. As long as we're talking about  communication around sexual interactions, perhaps it would be useful to people to  cultivate a language or a nomenclature there, too, to facilitate that. Some of the language that I've heard that  is quite useful is things like people have different arousal templates. Some people, certain ideas are stimulating to them and other ideas are aversive to them. And then there's this category in  between, where sometimes people sort of either don't know because they haven't  tried it or haven't thought about it, or they're sort of curious but kind of unsure. Or it might work in the right context, but maybe not all the time. So is there any kind of structure that's  been put out there as a way to improve communication around sexual interaction?

## [01:55:24] Sexual Interaction Communication, Sex Therapists

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, I mean, there's no  like script, but I think, in general, you want to have the conversation outside of  the bedroom. So not like right before sex or right  after sex, because that leads to a sense of insecurity for the other person. Right. Did I do something wrong? Did something go wrong here? So you want to kind of move those to a  neutral location. So, like kitchen table, in the car,  whatever, somewhere where sex is not going to happen, at least for that particular  moment.

**Andrew Huberman:** For folks listening, some challenging conversations on this podcast. Previously challenging because you're  trying to get things clear and as clear as possible. This one's challenging because there's so  many caveats to everything. Right? Of course people have sex in cars, right? Or they did when I was growing up, and  sometimes they still do. Okay, please continue.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. So that's one, and then two, when you're  discussing it, I mean, this kind of goes for any difficult conversation is like you make "I" statements, right? You say, I like it when this, I don't like it with this, it's not something you did, right? It's not, you didn't do this, you didn't  do that. It makes kind of an animosity sort of  situation. And then I think also part of it is like  being open about those things and it's not going to happen in one conversation. I think that's the hard part. Like, you think you're going to have a  conversation, it's going to go great, and things are going to be better. It's going to be like multiple  conversations, and some of them are not going to go well. Right? So that's another place where you can  actually get the help of a sex therapist. And there is a website for that. It's A-A-S-E-C-T, aasect.org, where you  can look for a sex therapist near you, and you can even do those things virtually. And so that can be really helpful when  you're having difficulty having a conversation.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah, I think, again,  such important conversations. And then when people differ in terms of  their level of experience, it gets potentially problematic, but also it can  be potentially educational. And then, of course, there are the twists  and turns that occur with when one is asking about somebody else's arousal  template. Oftentimes you'll learn things about  people's sexual past, and that can be either neutral, stimulating, or aversive. Right. That can open up all sorts of other issues related to the psychological interplay. So there's no way we can parse all of  those now. I just think it's worth highlighting that  it's understandable why those conversations are challenging, and it also is understanding why pornography isn't going to involve those conversations.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Right. Right.

**Andrew Huberman:** The only conversations  there are between your brain, your hands, and your eyes and your ears. Not going to highlight any particular  order there. I want to switch gears slightly and talk  about UTIs. I got a lot of questions about urinary  tract infections. Let's make it related to both females and  males, because, yes, males get urinary tract infections, females get them. More females asked about urinary tract  infections, how common are they? Should they always be treated with  antibiotics. Is cranberry really a good treatment? If so, why? Are there other things that are better as  it relates to the acidity or alkalinity? How does one prevent getting UTIs? Can you get them from swimming? Should you urinate after sex? Tell us about UTIs and how not to get them and how to get rid of them.

## [01:58:45] Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs) in Male & Females; Prevention, Vaginal Estrogen

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Happy to. So UTIs are very common in women. Probably up to 50% of women get at least  one UTI in their lifetime, and up to a third of them get recurrent UTIs. And what that means is they have two or  more in six months or three or more in a year. Now, this is common, and so we'll see a  lot of it. And it's not as, until you're having  recurrent UTIs, say you just have one a year or you have one every few years, it's not a huge issue. In men, however, UTIs are much less  common, and that's because the urethra is longer, so there's less entry from the  outside world into the bladder, which causes infections. And so when men get a UTI, it's concerning. Why is a man getting a UTI? There's multiple reasons that it could  happen, but it should be investigated so that you can make sure there's no anatomic abnormality or functional abnormality with the bladder that's causing the UTIs. In terms of prevention, there are kind of  major things that are highlighted in the guidelines that we all talk about. So one is hydration. So making sure you're drinking about two  to three liters of fluid, ideally water, a day, because dilution is the solution to  the pollution. Right. So drinking more fluids is going to get  that bacteria and you're going to pee it out. It's going to help keep, not let it sit  around in the bladder very often. Another thing in women who have altered  states of estrogen, whether it's postmenopausal, surgical menopause, or  maybe have reduced estrogen for postpartum or other reasons...

**Andrew Huberman:** What about during the  second half of the menstrual cycle?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Not necessarily for those  specific people, but for those specific times, because it's pretty short-lived, I  guess you could use it. But is vaginal estrogen. So vaginal estrogen, meaning estrogen  that's applied in the vagina either through a cream, a suppository, or a  ring, is highly effective in reducing the occurrence of recurrent UTIs. And this is because when you have low  estrogen, the pH in the vagina goes up and the pH in the vagina goes up because  there's less conversion of glycogen to lactobacilli, and then those lactobacilli  are preventative for UTIs. So essentially, you want to reduce the pH  back to its normal acidic pH. And vaginal estrogen is very effective at  doing that. In fact, in our clinics, we'll actually  check a vaginal pH to see if there is an indication that their pH is too high, that maybe they do need vaginal estrogen, particularly around like, perimenopause,  because it's hard to tell just by looking if they are really heading into a lower  estrogen state sometimes. And so that's very, very effective and  very, very safe. So when you look at estrogen, the Women's  Health Initiative, way back when, sort of made a big stink about how estrogen is  related to cancer. However, vaginal estrogen has never, ever  been a reported breast cancer, uterine cancer, or any other blood clot, any other adverse event associated with vaginal estrogen. You can get some breast tenderness, some  discharge, those things can occur, but the absorbed amount vaginally is so little  that your estrogen level barely goes up. It doesn't even reach premenopausal levels. So it just goes up very slightly in the  bloodstream, not enough to create any sort of abnormality. So vaginal estrogen is extremely safe, and it's pretty affordable. You could actually use coupons if your  insurance doesn't cover it, through GoodRx or Mark Cuban's pharmacy, and get it very affordably. And it's very effective. It does take about three months to work,  so you have to be consistent. You apply it about twice a week at night,  sometimes three times a week, and it's very effective. The ring you put in once and it lasts for  three months. So generally speaking, that's the most  effective option for low estrogen states. Other kind of simple things are trying to  make sure you're completely emptying your bladder. So over a lifetime, people can develop  some mild pelvic floor dysfunction, right? Not enough to create pain or discomfort,  but maybe they're not emptying completely, right? Because maybe they used to hold their  urine for long periods of time when they were a kid, or maybe they're always  hovering over the toilet because they don't want to sit on it at work. And over time, that can create a little  bit of mild dysfunction, which can make it more difficult to completely empty the  bladder. And when urine is sitting in the bladder  for long periods of time, it's basically food for bacteria to grow. And so bacteria grows. And then you get recurrent UTIs. So making sure you completely empty by  sitting, relaxing on the toilet, sometimes leaning forward and then maybe going a  second time. So standing up, sitting back down, going  again. And even for men, sometimes trying to sit  and see if you completely empty because sometimes standing you're not able to  empty completely.

**Andrew Huberman:** Whoa. A lot of men are going to... because it  was fun to research for this episode because there are entire discussions on  Reddit about what percentage of males sit while urinating. I mean, my understanding, based on having  visited many male bathrooms in my lifetime and just being in the world that I  assumed that men stood up in order to urinate. But there are a decent percentage of men  that sit down to urinate.

## [02:04:04] Male Urination Sitting; Spermicide, Cranberry, D-Mannose & UTIs

**Dr. Rena Malik:** There are. And in fact, it's variable by country. And probably the reason it's become more  interesting lately is the media.

**Andrew Huberman:** By country?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So a certain country was  recently surveyed, I think it was Germany, but essentially this recent  picked up by the media that Germans sit more often to pee. And so then people are like, oh, is this  better for me to sit to pee or stand to pee? And there was this whole big discussion on the media. But the reason being is when you're  sitting, your pelvic floor is most relaxed. And so if you're having any issues  emptying your bladder, you're going to pee better. Also if you have an enlarged prostate,  which I'm sure we're going to talk about prostate enlargement, that can sometimes  allow you to develop a little bit more intra-abdominal pressure because you're  sitting and you can lean forward to overcome sort of a blockage. And so there are some indications where  sitting is better, but if you're peeing fine and you're standing, that's fine too. I don't think you have to. I think it's just something that in other  countries they do more and here we don't. And I don't think it's right or wrong. It just depends on your individual  circumstance.

**Andrew Huberman:** Can spermicides or  condoms or both increase the frequency of UTIs for females?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So spermicides, absolutely. So spermicides, if your condom has  spermicide on it or you're using spermicides, that is a known risk factor  for UTIs. Other things I want to touch on, you did  ask about cranberry. So cranberry is actually in the American  Urological Association guidelines for prevention of recurrent UTIs in women. Now how does cranberry work? Right. Like, do I just drink juice? It's actually a specific active ingredient in the cranberry, which is called proanthocyanidins, or PACs. And they've actually looked at the amount  of PACs you need and what formulation. So you need 36 milligrams of PACs in a  soluble form. So a lot of the supplements on the market  will say that they're 36 milligrams of PACs, but they're like the whole berry. So they're using the skin of the berry and the stem of the berry, and that's not going to help you. So you need to make sure that the  supplement you're using is a soluble form of the cranberry. And it's actually very effective at  reducing the risk of UTIs.

**Andrew Huberman:** So do you mean capsules,  like a gel cap?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, it's a capsule that  you take once a day. And there is some, although not as much,  data that if you're having them around sex, which some women do always have  postcoital UTIs, that you can take two on the day of sex and two on the day after,  and that may be helpful, but there's not a lot of data there, but certainly an  option that you can try that's pretty low risk. So that's kind of the guidelines. Now, there's a ton of other things that  you can do to help prevent that are kind of available and have some data behind  them. So D-mannose is one of them. Where you take about 2 grams a day of  D-mannose and you drink it, and that actually helps reduce UTI risk. It's been studied in a small, randomized,  controlled trial to be effective. So those are kind of the bigger ones. There's other things that people use, like probiotics, but there's a lot of heterogeneity, as you know, in probiotics  and what to take. And are they really effective vaginally in the flora there? So those are kind of the big things. And there is actually a lot of microbiome  study in UTIs going on, actually at UCLA, where they're looking at the microbiome of people who are more at risk for UTIs or even overactive bladder, other conditions  like that. And they're trying to figure out, is there something here that we can target or that we can figure out is causing problems? Because sometimes we just can't figure out why it's happening. In terms of wiping from front to back, and swimming, and peeing after sex, there's no good data on any of those things. Wiping from front to back, I think it does create a little bit of shame. Like it's not a big deal if you wipe back  to front as long as you've cleaned yourself, so to speak. So I think it's less of an issue.

**Andrew Huberman:** What we're talking about  is, you're referring to any contamination from anal.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct.

**Andrew Huberman:** Any bacteria around the  anus?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct. And a lot of women who have recurrent UTIs tend to come and feel very dirty, like there's something wrong with them. They're like, oh, I wash all the time, I'm really clean, I'm really this, and it's not something they're doing. It's probably a microbiome effect or a  hormonal effect, or there's something going on that we need to investigate  further. It could also be anatomical or functional  problem where you're not emptying the bladder correctly. So there's lots of different factors. It could be, and it's very infrequent, I  would say, like, I've never seen a patient who's dirty and that's the reason they're getting UTIs.

**Andrew Huberman:** Perhaps even the opposite is true. They're cleaning too much, based on what  you told us earlier.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** And they're eliminating  the gut micro, excuse me, just rolls off the tongue again, no pun intended. Perhaps they are abolishing the local  microbiome on the skin. Too much cleaning eliminates the  microbiome on the skin. Not that we don't want to wash, but when  Sonnenburg was a guest on this podcast, he said, actually, kids can develop a very  healthy gut microbiome and general microbiome, oftentimes by, sorry parents,  not washing their hands before eating. If they've been playing with soil outside  or dirt, a little bit of that is actually healthy. Pets actually offer microbiome support. This is so weird, I know it sounds dirty,  but we have to imagine how we evolved as a species was not with antibacterial soaps  and alcohol swabs everywhere. And obviously, we don't want infections,  but overcleaning can disrupt the microbiome, which presumably can lead to  UTIs. So perhaps someone who's cleaning  excessively is more at risk than somebody who's cleaning a little less.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely. And actually, the cleaning can irritate  the dermis, right. So you can actually get contact  dermatitis-type symptoms from overcleaning. And so that's one of the things, we're  like, I definitely have a UTI, I definitely have one. Well, no, you don't, but there's a host of other things that it could be. One of them could be that another very  common one that we already touched on is pelvic floor dysfunction. So very often, pelvic floor dysfunction,  just like you had pain with urination, women can also develop pain with urination that doesn't go away. And it can start where they had a UTI that triggered the pelvic floor, and then the pelvic floor just didn't relax, but the  pain just triggered the pelvic floor to tense up. And it didn't relax because, again, we're  not taught how to relax our pelvic floor. And then they've developed pelvic floor  dysfunction. Like, why is the UTI not going away? Or why does it keep coming back? And so that's another common thing that we see in people who have, quote, unquote, recurrent UTIs but don't really have them.

**Andrew Huberman:** To be clear, I  experienced the pain in urination as a consequence of trying those damn Kegels  that everyone's talking about stopping. That was informative in two directions. One, it relieved the pain very quickly, so that was good. The other was, I realized that it is  possible to have a pelvic floor that's neither hypercontracted nor overrelaxed,  and in some cases, just not doing anything for it is the best circumstance.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Right.

**Andrew Huberman:** And the only reason I  mentioned that is because, obviously, this discussion is not about my pelvic floor,  this discussion is about the fact that some people perhaps need to clean less. Some people maybe more, but probably not,  based on what you said. Some people might need to strengthen their pelvic floor, some people might need to relax their pelvic floor, and some  people's pelvic floor is probably A-OK. I think any discussion about anything  medical or especially hormone stuff, this happens a lot in the discussions around  that I get into. It seems with males, every male now seems  to wonder if their testosterone is too low, except the ones that are blasting  testosterone, because they know it's excessively high. And as you point out earlier, at least in  terms of sexual function, that's unlikely to be the case. Maybe less desire, but in terms of  genital-based arousal function, probably, yeah.

## [02:11:33] Testosterone, Post-Menopausal Women & Libido

**Dr. Rena Malik:** And I mean, you've talked  about testosterone a lot on the podcast, so I'm sure your audience knows very well  the multitude of benefits for testosterone. So I think there is value in assessing  hormone panels and assessing your level of free testosterone, testosterone, and  assessing if you're having... symptoms are not always sexual. Right. It can be depression, it can be weight  gain, that you're not gaining muscle mass. You can have cognitive changes. So those things can still be a sign of low testosterone and very valuable and important to assess.

**Andrew Huberman:** That reminds me of  another thing, and then we'll get back to UTIs. And I want to talk about kidney stones,  but I've heard of women using a small amount of testosterone cream directly on  the clitoris as a way to amplify the, maybe it's the desire and arousal effect,  or perhaps just one or the other.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So the way that we discuss testosterone use, and there are, like, consensus statements, and there's actually an abundance of data on testosterone use, particularly in postmenopausal  women, for low libido or low sexual desire. And it's all been very positive in the  sense there's been increased sexual desire, based on validated  questionnaires, increased number of sexually satisfying events with  testosterone use. Now, the range of testosterone in women is about a tenth of the amount of testosterone a man needs. Right? So testosterone cream is systemically  absorbed wherever you apply it. And so the way we generally recommend  women to try this if they are having low libido, and we've ruled out other issues  that may be psychologic —relationship, other issues that can affect libido,  medications. There's a lot of things, obviously, that  go into that. And we've checked their testosterone. It appears to be low for physiologic  levels for women, which, again, is one tenth of the male level, then we can  actually prescribe off-label testosterone. And the guidelines or the consensus  statements are not like true guidelines, but they recommend using transdermal  testosterone. So getting Androgel tubes from the  pharmacy and putting a tenth of one tube on the back of the calf or the upper outer buttock, a hairless area, for absorption, that can improve desire  overall. And then the other place we use  testosterone is in women who have what we call vestibulodynia. So the vestibule is the area outside the  vagina, which is very hormonally active. There's lots of androgen receptors there,  and it can actually, when you have hormonal issues, meaning lower  testosterone and estrogen in that area, it can cause pain. And so actually applying a combined or  compounded estrogen-testosterone cream to that area over time can reduce that pain  and discomfort. So, as you know, testosterone receptors,  or androgen receptors all over the body, very much in the genitals, very much in  the brain, and they're very useful to... a very useful place to treat women for  those issues.

**Andrew Huberman:** Thank you. Kidney stones. I hope to never have one. Dr.

## [02:14:56] Kidney Stones: Prevention & Treatment

**Dr. Rena Malik:** I hope you don't either.

**Andrew Huberman:** But people get them. How do you avoid getting them and how do  you get rid of them? So, kidney stones, very often they can be  for a variety of different metabolic disorders. Right. So it can be one, dehydration is a very  common cause of it. So dehydration combined with maybe a  slight metabolic abnormality where you're creating more calcium or oxalate in your  urine, can result in kidney stones. And so how can you prevent them? I mean, each person is individual. If you get a kidney stone, typically we do what's called a 24-hour urine analysis plus some bloodwork to assess what is the  metabolic abnormality. So we can target that either with diet or  with medication. And so the kind of general recommendations for people who have kidney stones. One is increase your fluid intake to 2 to  3 liters. Again, the same number I told you before;  you want to decrease your oxalate intake.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Now, if you Google  oxalate, you're going to find a million things that you eat that have oxalate in  them. But the big ones are spinach and rhubarb. We're seeing a lot of nuts, too, that  are, you know, people eating a lot more nuts to get more protein. So cutting back, it's impossible to get  rid of all of that in your diet. But if you're having, like, a spinach  salad every day, well, switch it to a different green. Right? Don't eat spinach every day. Also, you want to increase your citrate  intake. That's an inhibitor of kidney stone  formation. So increasing fruits and things like  that, to increase citrate vegetables as well. Actually, one easily accessible thing is  Crystal Light. It has a high citrate composition, so you  can drink Crystal Light with that, two to three liters. And that can be helpful. You want to decrease your protein intake. So high levels of purines or purinergic  meats, like red meats and things, can also put you at higher risk. So these are kind of the general sort of  preventative measures we talk about for kidney stones. If you have a kidney stone, so a lot of  times, people can have kidney stones in their kidneys, they're not creating any  problems, they're tiny, we can observe them over time. If they start getting very large or they  are starting to move into the ureters or the tubes that drain the kidney,  oftentimes they're accompanied with pain. Quite a bit of pain, and it can be very  uncomfortable. In those cases if they're not having any  infection symptoms, there's no signs of a urinary tract infection, there's no  fevers, no chills, we can treat it conservatively with pain medication, and  also there are medications like flomax, which are used for enlarged prostate as  well, that actually relaxes the ureteral smooth muscle to allow the stone to pass a little bit better. If you're having an infection, you got to  get it treated right away. You can get very sick very quickly. In fact, I've seen young, healthy  patients, like, they're healthier than me, walk in the ER with a kidney stone,  and within 24 hours, they're in the ICU because they're really sick because of a  kidney stone.

**Andrew Huberman:** Fever, urinating,  tea-colored urine, meaning blood in the urine, all of those are important warning  signs that you ideally don't get to.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, blood in the urine,  I mean, doesn't always mean infection. It could just be irritation from the  stone, but certainly fevers, chills, or you have a sign of an infection and the  stone looks like it's blocking. So if you get imaging and you see what's  called hydro nephrosis, or pressure behind the kidney, and you have these signs of  infection, we don't want to wait because you can get sick pretty quickly. And then to treat the kidney stones,  there's three major options. One is shockwaves. Another is ureteroscopy, where we go in  with a camera and we have a small laser, we break it up into small pieces and---

**Andrew Huberman:** Where is the camera  inserted? Through the urethra.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Correct. You're asleep under anesthesia, so you  don't have to---

**Andrew Huberman:** You saw that---

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, I saw----

**Andrew Huberman:** You saw the wince.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** And then percutaneous  nephrolithotomy, which is done if you have a large kidney stone or a very hard  kidney stone that's up in the kidney, you can go in through the back with a small,  like a small incision and with a specialized camera that goes in and uses  ultrasonic lithotripsy to break up that stone and kind of suck it out that way.

**Andrew Huberman:** They're extremely helpful bits of information, or not even bits. This is enormous amount of useful  information. I like to pivot, again, for sake of  breadth. We can't go into extreme depth on  everything, but appreciate your willingness to follow this carousel with  me. Oral contraception. Previously on this podcast, I hosted a  female physician guest who offered both sides of female oral contraception,  discussed some of the benefits, discussed some of the risks. I made the decision to post clips about  both on the internet, and wow, wow, wow, was I surprised, but also, frankly, a bit  shocked. And then finally intrigued by how  polarized the discussion is around female oral contraception and female  contraception in general. So, NuvaRing, Norplant, the pill, broad  category of things there, but for sake of discussion, the pill, et cetera. I mean it seemed that approximately 50% of responses, which seemed to come mainly from women, were of the, this stuff is  terrible, it ruined my life, it ruins lives, it destroys you. It has immense risk. And then the other half seemed to say,  no, there's reduced risk of certain forms of cervical cancer. This has allowed me the sexual choices and lifestyle that I prefer without risk of pregnancy. I mean, it was astonishing to the point  where I thought, wow, if only I could post both clips simultaneously. So obviously, I don't know what the answer is, but I do know that this is among the more polarizing topics available for  discussion. So what is the story, meaning, what are  the data about oral contraception? Why so much controversy? And what's the real deal here?

## [02:19:14] Oral Contraception, Libido, Individuality, Intrauterine Device (IUDs)

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes, so it is a very  polarizing topic. And there is abundance data, abundant data. In fact, we even did a study, and again,  this is not like high-quality evidence, but we looked at Reddit threads, and we  looked at sexual dysfunction, specifically low libido, orgasmic difficulties. And we read hundreds of threads and we did like a qualitative analysis to see---

**Andrew Huberman:** In females. ---

**Dr. Rena Malik:** in females, to see what  are people talking about and problems with oral contraceptives and antidepressants  leading to low libido. And being very, as you describe, very  like, this has ruined my life was very common. And so the theory is that taking oral  contraceptives increases the amount of sex hormone-binding globulin, which binds  testosterone and estrogen, and that actually makes testosterone less  available, which is, as we've talked about, a very important hormone for desire. And so in some subset of people, they're  seeing very significant consequences of taking oral contraceptives. Now, I think that we don't know which  women are going to have this problem and we don't know how. It's probably a very small subset of  people. But we do know that this does happen and  that when you measure SHBG levels, they're up. And that even after they stop the oral  contraceptives, you'll see elevated SHBG levels from baseline.

**Andrew Huberman:** For how long?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** You know, for like, at  least four months afterwards, you'll still see elevated SHBG levels. So we don't know.

**Andrew Huberman:** But not infinite.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** We don't know.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah, the endocrine  system is weird because we assume everything is a short-term effect, but  there's some plasticity in the system, especially because it's a neuroendocrine  system.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Exactly. Yeah.

**Andrew Huberman:** Okay.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So I think, yeah, there's  some neuroplasticity there that occurs as well. And so we do see this. And I think that the other side of it is,  yeah, absolutely, oral contraceptives are amazing, right? They're helpful for sexual freedom, for  preventing pregnancy, for a lot of things, and particularly other conditions  too, like PCOS and other problems. Oral contraceptives are amazing and  they've changed gynecology and management of these women in a very positive way. And so I think, yes, I do think that there is oral contraceptive-related sexual dysfunction. Usually low dose estrogen sort of  contraceptives are the culprit. But I think that again, the data, female  sexual dysfunctional literature is just not as robust as male sexual dysfunction  literature.

**Andrew Huberman:** I saw a lot of comments  about how oral contraception had led to depressive-like symptoms or just kind of  ahedonia and apathy, not just lowered libido. I can imagine how that would be the case  through the elevated sex hormone-binding globulin, which is preventing  testosterone, estrogen from being free, literally, and exerting their effects on  not just the body but the brain. But is there any evidence that oral  contraception can disrupt neurotransmitters? I'm not aware of any.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** I don't think so. Not to my knowledge.

**Andrew Huberman:** Okay, well, it sounds to  me like oral contraception for women, because that's where we normally hear  about it. It sounds like there's a varied response  and it's highly individual. I've certainly had partners that love the  pill, or at least didn't seem to mind it. I've had some that hated it and no way  tried that, never will, or just went with other forms of contraception or for  whatever reason were not using contraception. So it seems to me that there's a lot of  variation out there. How does one explore that without risk of  permanent damage? It sounds like truly permanent damage is  unlikely. What are the other options? Is, the ring, copper IUD?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So any sort of long-acting hormonal contraceptive we've seen, that's what we counsel patients on, is if  they're having issues with oral contraceptives, even if they come in with  pelvic pain and they're on oral contraceptives, I'll tell them, you know  what, just stop. Because maybe the effect on the androgen  receptors, or estrogen receptors is affecting the lubrication or other  things, we're not sure. But why don't you stop it and go get a  long-acting contraceptive method.

**Andrew Huberman:** Like an IUD?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Like an IUD.

**Andrew Huberman:** And are IUDs safe? And here we should probably say, okay,  copper IUD is one form. You want to mention a few of the other  forms?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So I don't prescribe  IUDs, but generally speaking they're very safe. Of course there's risk with any sort of. You know it's a procedure, you're  inserting an IUD, so there's obviously some small risks associated with it, but  it is safe and effective form of contraception.

**Andrew Huberman:** If people are wondering  why the copper IUD is an effective form of contraception, copper is like the third  rail for sperm, as I understand it. So much so that I was able to find some  evidence for this in the medical textbooks, that in the old days, as I  say, prostitutes who wanted to avoid pregnancy would put copper pennies in  their vagina.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Really?

**Andrew Huberman:** Now, I don't recommend  that to anyone, and please, and I don't think it's a foolproof form of  contraception, but there is evidence that that did happen. So, which is amazing. That means that people somehow figured out the copper-sperm relationship, which isn't a good one for the sperm, and  deduced from that a behavior.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, that's, that's---

**Andrew Huberman:** Rena's cringing. [

**Dr. Rena Malik:** LAUGHING]

**Andrew Huberman:** I am not suggesting  people do that. I think it's just an interesting medical  factoid. I can tell you want to move on from this  topic, so we will. Before discussing prostate and anal sex,  not stated next to one another for any particular reason, I want to talk about  SSRIs. A lot of people over the last 20, 30 years have been prescribed selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and other  antidepressants that have disrupted their sexual function, or their sexual desire,  seems in particular. Do you see a lot of this in your clinic? Do you hear about it? What can people do about it? Oftentimes these sexual arousal or  dysfunction issues associated with SSRIs and other medications make those  medications prohibitive for people.

## [02:26:52] Anti-Depressants, SSRIs & Low Libido

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, you know, serotonin is kind of the anti to orgasm. And so, in fact, we will use SSRIs  off-label for people who are having premature ejaculation. So it delays ejaculation, and then there's also other sexual dysfunctions we see with it. And it does happen, absolutely. It's dose dependent. So in some cases, when someone comes in  with SSRI-related dysfunction, if they're doing well, you can either try to reduce  the dose or switch them to another antidepressant, for example, Wellbutrin,  that does not have such severe effects on sexual function. And so you can also use like Cialis and  Viagra, like what we've talked about for erectile dysfunction as an addition if we  can't change their medication management. Because you know, this gets a little bit  complicated because we know erectile dysfunction and depression are very  interrelated. Now, what's causing what? And where do we, maybe somebody went to  see their doctor for depression, but was also having issue with erections, and  now, if you fix the erections, do you help with the depression? You know what I mean?

**Andrew Huberman:** Males everywhere are  shouting yes.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So I think that there's a  lot of discussion that has to be had there. It's a lot easier to talk to your primary  care doctor about depression than it is about your erections. And so I think it's important to really  dig into that a little bit. But, yes, it is definitely a known thing. We use it to our advantage when needed,  and it can be helpful to switch medications or reduce the dose.

**Andrew Huberman:** You mentioned earlier  that trazodone can cause sustained erection. And is trazodone in the category of  touching the serotonin transmission system?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** I don't remember the  mechanism, but interestingly, trazodone is also used for off-label, like as a third  or fourth line for premature ejaculation as well. So, I don't remember the mechanism offhand.

**Andrew Huberman:** Let's talk about prostate and prostate health. Earlier, I queued up that there's a  growing trend toward, I would say, more progressive male physicians — or  physicians who treat males. Excuse me.

## [02:29:32] Prostate Health, Cialis, Urination Difficulty

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Thanks for that.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah. Prescribing low dose 2.5 to 5 milligram  Cialis, which is tadalafil, which may assist with erections. But the rationale for this low dose, daily low dose is not centered around erections per se, it's really about prostate health. Improving blood flow to the prostate,  reducing prostitis, maybe even reducing the probability of prostate cancer. What other sorts of things are you  encouraging men to think about when thinking about their prostate?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. So, before I forget, I want to mention  that low-dose tadalafil is actually a treatment for erectile dysfunction. In fact, it works quite well, particularly in men who are having a lot of psychogenic issues. One, because they don't have to remember  to take a pill before sex, it's always on board. And you're taking 5 milligrams every day  and it has a 36 hours half-life, so you're kind of increasing those. So it can actually work quite well and is  a great option for erectile dysfunction. So I do want to make that caveat. In terms of prostate health, it has been  shown to be effective for BPH, or enlarged prostate, and this is a very common  condition. In fact, if you look at autopsy studies,  80% of men at 80 have an enlarged prostate, like it's very, very common now. Does everyone get symptoms, and what's the long-term concerns of it and what can you do about it? So, typically, as the prostate enlarges,  it's right around the urethra. It's a walnut-shaped gland sits underneath the bladder around the urethra, and it can narrow the urethra or the P-tube. And so over time, you can imagine, like,  if you're, I always give this example, if you're sucking from a straw, right? You're drinking from a straw. If you have a wide diameter straw, it's  really easy to drink. If your straw gets really narrow, like,  say you take a coffee straw and you drink out of that, it's very difficult to drink. Very similarly, it can become very  difficult to urinate if you have an enlarged prostate. Now, what causes an enlarged prostate? There's a whole host of factors. A lot of them are genetic. So if your father or your grandfather had  a large prostate, you're probably more likely to have an enlarged prostate. Do we know exactly how to prevent that? Not exactly, but we know how to mediate  the symptoms a little bit. So the other symptoms you'll see before  you have difficulty urinating is sometimes you'll see overactivity. So you'll see your bladder is responding  to having to push hard against that narrow urethra to push urine out. So it's having more urgency, like the  sudden desire to go to the bathroom that you can't delay. You're maybe going more frequently, and  very often, you're going more often at night. And so those are kind of the first signs  people will see. And then over time, it may become more and more difficult to empty the bladder. You might see some hesitancy, like, you're waiting for your stream to start, or it stops and starts, or you're just like, I  can't empty. It's not because it just drips or a very  weak stream. And so those are kind of the things that  can happen over a lifetime. Now, what are some things that you can do  to help? Cialis helps relax the fiber, the smooth  muscle of the prostate, so that it allows urine to pass more easily. There's also other medications that you  can treat very often, Flomax or other alpha blockers are helpful in that area. In terms of things that you can do in  general for bladder health, prostate health, there are certain things that are  irritants to that area. And so what I tell people, not everyone's  affected the same way, so I don't want people to be like, oh, I got to stop all  these delicious things I eat and drink, but certainly it can be useful to just pay attention. So, like, if, say, you drink coffee every  day and you find yourself running to the bathroom a lot. If you limit your caffeine intake, you  might see that you're not going to the bathroom quite as often because caffeine  is a bladder irritant. So that can be coffee, tea, chocolate,  things of that nature that have caffeine in them; energy drinks — sometimes people  forget they have caffeine in them. And so limiting, that may improve your  symptoms. Alcohol also is a bladder irritant, and  these have actually been studied in animal models. And you'll see that the bladder contracts  more often when they're given these sorts of substances. And it's dose dependent. And some people can actually habituate or  get used to a certain dose of caffeine, so if you're drinking coffee every day, you  may have less symptoms than someone who drinks it every once in a while. Other things can be sometimes carbonated  beverages, spicy foods or acidic foods. Those sorts of things can also irritate  the bladder lining. So sometimes limiting those things may be  helpful in those situations.

**Andrew Huberman:** Thank you so much. That's very informative. Years ago, there was a discussion about  bicycle seats causing damage to the prostate, maybe even sexual dysfunction. Is that still a thing? I thought they put grooves into the  seats, but I've also, in reading on the internet, I didn't do a deep dive on  Reddit, but seems that women are reporting some bladder incontinence from excessive  bicycle seat use, maybe even exercise bike. It doesn't have to be road bike.

## [02:34:22] Bicycling, Genital Numbness, Erectile Dysfunction

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, so this is a great  point. So cycling, if you think about it, right,  you're sitting on your perineum, which is that space for men between the scrotum and the anus — for women, between the vagina and the anus. And right there runs your pudendal artery  and your pudendal nerve, which are again, responsible for blood flow and nerve  function to the area. So the most common things we see in people who are really high-volume cyclers, now, the studies have looked at, like, maybe  they did a 350-kilometer race or they're biking three times a week for 60 minutes,  but there's no consistency. But they're seeing pretty high rates of  genital numbness. So, like up to 50%. And also in men,  erectile dysfunction. In women, you'll also see numbness, but  because sensation is a big part of arousal, you'll also see kind of decreased lubrication, maybe decreased arousal as well in women. And so how can you prevent that? The reason is because when you're  sitting, particularly if you're leaning forward like competitive bikers do, or  aero riding, you're putting pressure on the beak of the bicycle seat. And that's where most of the, your weight  is not distributed evenly. So the goal is to take a bike seat that  allows you to sit comfortably on your ischial tuberosities, and posture is a  huge part of your pelvic floor. I know we didn't talk about that earlier,  but sitting with good posture and not kind of slouching or leaning forward can  actually really do wonders for your pelvic floor. So focusing on posture is helpful, but  also when biking, posture is helpful. So they've actually looked at this data  and they found that people who aero ride, meaning lean forward, or people who use  narrow bike seats, are more likely to have issues. And so you want to get kind of a noseless  seat and a wider seat. The cutouts, actually, when they've looked at kind of mechanics of the cutouts, they'll see higher pressure around the  opening. So it's actually not good to have a bike  with a cutout, bike seat with a cutout, because they've seen, at least with some  of the cutouts, that the pressure actually becomes higher on the area that's right  around it.

**Andrew Huberman:** Very important point. I don't cycle. I don't like the exercise bike. I'll sometimes ride the assault bike,  which has the big seat, for a few minutes.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** But I just want to add one thing, because I don't want to make people not cycle. I think it's really valuable, cycling is a great aerobic exercise, has lots of benefit for cardiovascular health. But there was actually another study that  looked at people who were parts of sports clubs, so they were like swimmers, runners and cyclists, and they looked at rates of dysfunction and they found that actually  the rate of erectile dysfunction was not different between runners, swimmers and  cyclers. So maybe because those other studies were  just looking at cyclers, that maybe it's just the general rate of erectile  dysfunction in that population at that point in time. So the numbness is definitely an issue,  the erectile dysfunction, maybe, maybe not.

**Andrew Huberman:** So I just have a couple  of more questions for you, and by the way, you've been incredibly generous with  your time and information here.

## [02:37:48] Anal Sex, Females, Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs), Lubricants

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Thank you. Thank you.

**Andrew Huberman:** So I really appreciate  it, as I'm sure our listeners do as well. Anal sex. You recently did a post describing the  multiple reasons why women do or do not have anal sex.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes.

**Andrew Huberman:** Very interesting post,  very interesting study that you covered, and you explained it very clearly. I'm guessing there are relatively few, but perhaps some other studies as well. About this. Let's talk about anal sex, and maybe if  you could just offer some of the key bullet points that you've learned from the literature and from your clinical practice. How frequent is it? With protection, without protection? How safe is it? What are the different reasons people do  it? That might seem like a kind of a silly  question, but it turns out when it comes to this topic, there are interesting data. Educate us.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** So, anal sex. Let's talk about it. Well, when you talk about anal sex, the  reason people, it's become more and more common. Let's say, it's, more and more  heterosexual couples are doing it. We know that male homosexual couples are  having anal sex. And I think the one thing is that it's  safe in terms of pregnancy. Right. You're not going to get pregnant from anal sex, which is one of the reasons people do engage in anal sex.

**Andrew Huberman:** Do you think that's the  reason people are doing it more frequently?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** No, I think that's one of  the reasons that people, one of the reasons people do. But in general, the issue with anal sex is that people forget to use protection, like a condom, for example, because  sexually transmitted infections are actually more likely with anal sex than  they are with vaginal penetrative intercourse. Because the anal tissue is very thin and  friable. So when you penetrate the anus,  particularly if you have any trauma, you can have blood loss, and that blood loss  can then easily, more easily transmit sexually transmitted infection. So it's really important to use a condom  and use adequate lubrication. The anus does not make any of its  endogenous lubrication, you have to use lubricant. The other interesting thing about anal sex is that the anus pH is different from the vaginal pH. So you want to use specific lubricants  that are iso-osmolar to anal pH. So you can actually look up anal  lubricants. And we could talk about lubricants, but  generally there's water-based, silicone-based, oil-based lubricants. Water-based are the most easily  accessible, silicone-based, are a little more slippery and last a little longer,  and oil-based also last longer, but are not good for use with condoms. So definitely using lubricants and always  kind of making sure to be in the context, of course, of being consensual, but also  never force, always take your time. And those things are really important to  avoid trauma because trauma can happen. And usually it's not severe trauma. Right. It's not going to create long-lasting  problems, but it is inconvenient, uncomfortable, and probably we're not  seeing as much of it because they're not coming to the emergency room if they're  having issues, unless it's really serious. So I think it's really important, one, to  prevent from sexually transmitted infections. Two, to be thoughtful and cautious. And sometimes it requires some preparation. If you're going to penetrate an anus,  you're not going to start with a large girth item, you're going to start with  something smaller and kind of work your way up. And then I think ultimately, why people  have anal sex, so, as I mentioned earlier, the prostate is highly innervated and can be a source of pleasure, so some people enjoy that. Particularly men may enjoy anal  penetration. Women as well may enjoy anal penetration  because of the innervation around there, the pelvic floor. That's certainly reasonable to do so. As far as why people engage in anal sex. So sometimes it's because, as I  mentioned, they're trying to avoid vaginal penetration, either to avoid pregnancy or maybe menstruation or other reasons. Sometimes it's because people want to do  something special with their partner. Like, they feel like this is my special  thing with this partner that I do with them. And so it may be something kind of like a  gift or something like that. Sometimes it's almost like they feel like  they have to. And this particular study that I looked  at, there's actually not a lot of studies on why people engage in anal sex. And this particular study that I had  talked about on my channel or on my Instagram was talking about why they  specifically recruit drug users. And so a lot of people had used drugs  prior to engaging in anal sex. And I think that that's not ideal. You always want to be kind of in the right state of mind for consent and safety purposes. And so those were kind of the common  reasons.

**Andrew Huberman:** What about infection not  related to sexually transmitted infection? My presumption is there is a higher risk  with anal sex than there is with other vaginal intercourse, oral sex, et cetera. But is there evidence for that?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Not necessarily. It's more about sexually transmitted  infections more than anything else. The rare things that people have kind of  commented on, like anal incontinence temporarily or things like that, very rare. Mostly it's just sexually transmitted  infections because it's more easy to create bleeding through anal sex if you're not careful.

**Andrew Huberman:** And are people doing  enemas before anal sex to prevent bacterial infection, or is that just like  it's a kind of...

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Some people are, some  people are not. I think people are making sure they're  evacuated fully. There's some media articles about what you should eat before to kind of keep your gut healthy and avoid kind of loose stools and things like that. But generally speaking, there's lots of  things you can look up to make it safe and healthy again.

**Andrew Huberman:** I'm sure some people are  listening to this and maybe they've turned it off already, and I think we can expect a varied response to this discussion, but it's happening out there.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** It's happening.

**Andrew Huberman:** Apparently with an  increasing frequency.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yes. And I don't know if that's because of the  increasing availability of pornography where it's visualized more, or if I don't  really know why, but we do know that there's more going on in heterosexual  couples than prior.

## [02:44:14] Libido, Behavioral Interventions, Supplements

**Andrew Huberman:** As a final category of  question, I was really interested in some of the posts you've done about herbs and  supplements in the context of sexual desire and sexual function on this podcast. I always say, always, always always, we  emphasize behavioral tools first, dos and don'ts, right, because those are the  foundation of mental health, physical health and performance in all contexts. There is of course a role for prescription drugs, sometimes. Oftentimes people can't do the things and  avoid the certain things they want to because of depressive states, anxious  states, et cetera, and prescription drugs can serve a role. But I do believe the goal is always  behaviors first. Then of course things like adequate  sleep, nutrition, healthy social interaction, all of that stuff, exercise. But we do often talk about supplements  because they represent, I think, an important category of over-the-counter  compounds that can play a role. And I've talked before about Tongkat Ali,  this Indonesian herb, I think it can be Malaysian as well. But this Indonesian herb is typically the  one that I am aware works best for mild libido enhancement. Sometimes, especially in the case of  people taking SSRIs, it can enhance libido to override some of the challenges with  SSRI-induced reduction in libido. And generally, even if people aren't under SSRIs, I hear from people who take Tongkat Ali and get libido increases. Also things like Maca root, which we don't really know how these things work exactly. Probably some freeing up of testosterone  with Tongkat Ali, maybe some cortisol suppression as well, maybe some estrogen  receptor modulation with Maca root, maybe some dopaminergic tone changes. Shilajit, this ayurvedic herb, which there is at least one study that I think is done well that shows increases in FSH,  follicle-stimulating hormone with Shilajit use. What are your thoughts on things like  Tongkat Ali, Maca root? Shilajit, how do you talk to your patients about this stuff?

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, so I think that I  see at least my patient population is still in the behavioral management place,  right. The biggest cause of sexual dysfunction,  whether it's low testosterone, erectile dysfunction. Sexual dysfunction is often comorbidities. Right? So managing high blood pressure, managing  diabetes with diet, which you talk about a lot, but the best studied diet is the  Mediterranean diet, at least in the sexual dysfunction literature. Exercise, like, doing both cardiovascular  aerobic exercise, but also doing resistance training, particularly of large muscle groups, and then really working on reducing blood pressure and preventing  diabetes. And those things, I think are really key. And I know you talk about them a lot on  this podcast, but I will tell you that when people are getting ready for, for  example, we do a surgery for erectile dysfunction called penile prosthesis. So this is like, end of the line,  nothing's working, they can't get an erection at all. And they may have diabetes as a cause of  it. And when we say you have to get your  hemoglobin A1C below a certain level to do surgery, I cannot tell you how quickly  these men change their behaviors.

**Andrew Huberman:** For sake of erection.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** For sake of erections. So I think that really, if I can say one  thing before you do supplements, which I don't have a problem with, I think that  it's reasonable to try them. I would try one at a time to see what's  working, so you're not taking a bunch of things and not knowing what exactly is  working and realizing that they're not going to work immediately. If you take something that works  immediately, it's probably got a PDE5 inhibitor mixed in there. And so it's going to kind of build over  time, and you're going to see changes over time. But I would say that the number one thing  that I recommend for people is improving their diet, exercising, getting good sleep. As you know, it boosts testosterone. And even you mention this all the time  about getting early morning light, but it's beneficial for testosterone as well,  because you're helping release testosterone with the circadian biology. So I think that those things I can't  stress enough, like, how valuable they are. And if you're smoking, quit smoking, it  will kill your erection.

**Andrew Huberman:** And vaping.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** And vaping.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** And then lastly, if you  are developing true organic impotence, meaning that there's a biologic problem  that's causing your sexual dysfunction, then it's really important to get your  cardiovascular health assessed, because about 15% of men who develop erectile  dysfunction seven years later will have a cardiovascular event. It is the canary in the coal mine, meaning that it's the sign that you may be developing cardiovascular problems or like endothelial dysfunction that's first presenting in the penis or in their sexual organs. And this probably is the same for women,  we just don't have the data yet.

## [02:49:15] Supplements for Libido

**Andrew Huberman:** I know a good number of  women that take Tongkat Ali, in part, I think, on the recommendation, although I  want to be clear, I never recommended it. It was an offer of something that people  could try if they're doing everything else correctly and could assess with  consulting your physician, of course. And they too, some of them have reported  improvements in libido and desire as well.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Well, that makes sense.

**Andrew Huberman:** Shilajit is less known  about the distinguishing quality versus low quality sources of Shilajit is harder. Dosing is harder. It comes as this tar typically. Maybe more science on Shilajit will come  out in the next few years. We could get behind it a bit more. Right now I'm sort of on the, yeah, maybe  if you are an adventurer, you might try it, but it's not one that I normally throw to the top of the list.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Yeah, I think that, like  L-citrulline is pretty good. Ashwagandha for stress reduction, which  also has implications for sexual function. Tongkat Ali has reasonable data. I think there is reasonable data on these  things, I think the website you talk about all the time, examine.com, is a great  place to look at that. And like I said, I think it's reasonable. They're smaller studies, there is bias in  many studies, but there is effort done in this area, and there's never going to be  really high-quality science. No one's going to really fund that, I  think. So I think our expectations need to be a  little tempered when it comes to that stuff.

**Andrew Huberman:** Well, Rena, Dr. Malik, I want to thank you ever so much  for this discussion today. You provide us so much useful information  and really have transcended the divide between the mysterious thing that everyone wants to know about sex and sexual health, genitals and genital health,  prostate, urethra, UTIs, all these topics that many people are just afraid to raise  and to confront directly. And you've taught us so much about how to  promote the health of this incredibly important system.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Absolutely.

**Andrew Huberman:** One thing we know for  sure, either in vivo or in a dish, we're all here because a sperm and an egg. And of course, there are other reasons why people engage in sexual activity that have nothing to do with reproduction, but  surely it is core to our biology and our psychology and well-being. So thank you so much. And also thank you for the work you do day in and day out, week in and week out in your clinic, we will provide links to your clinic. People are interested in working with you  directly as well as online. That's how I initially found you. And when I did, I was just absolutely  delighted. I thought, finally there's somebody who's  providing the kind of information that everybody wants in a thoughtful, logical,  clear and respectful way. So on behalf of all the listeners and  viewers, and on behalf of myself, I just want to say thank you. Thank you. Thank you for what you do, and please keep going and please come back.

**Dr. Rena Malik:** Thank you so much. And honestly, the work you do is  phenomenal. It's an honor to be here. Thank you so much.
