---
title: "LIVE EVENT Q&A: Dr. Andrew Huberman Question & Answer in Chicago, IL"
type: transcript
episode_number: 331
episode_date: "2023-12-13"
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
youtube_id: LRM5LutB538
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:00] Introduction

Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life.

Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live event at The Chicago Theater in Chicago, Illinois. The event consisted of a lecture entitled "The Brain Body Contract" followed by a question and answer session. We wanted to make sure that the question and answer session was available to everybody, regardless of who could attend in person. I also want to make sure to thank the sponsors of that event, which were AG1 and Eight Sleep.

Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct, and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3 degrees. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3 degrees. With Eight Sleep, you can program the temperature of your sleeping environment in the beginning, middle, and end of your night. It has a number of other features, like tracking the amount of rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep that you get, things that are essential to really dialing in the perfect night's sleep for you. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for well over two years now, and it has greatly improved my sleep. I fall asleep far more quickly, I wake up far less often in the middle of the night, and I wake up feeling far more refreshed than I ever did prior to using an Eight Sleep mattress cover.

AG1 is an all in one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 since 2012, so I'm delighted that they sponsored the live event. The reason I started taking AG1, and the reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a day, is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins, minerals, probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health, physical health, and performance.

And now, without further ado, the question and answer session from our live event at The Chicago Theater in Chicago, Illinois.

## [00:02:42] What Is Your Best Advice to Keep My Brain Healthy in Old Age?

The advice is the same advice I give to anybody, which is that, essentially, all of the things that improve cardiovascular health and perfusion of your bodily tissues are going to improve functionality of the brain. Because, of course, the brain is a rich consumer of fuel, requires very good portals to deliver those fuels, and the capillaries, micro capillaries and arteries, and so forth, need to be clean and clear. That's the big one. This is why I think the prescription now that's generally accepted — and here I'm borrowing from my friend Peter Attia — is about 150, or maybe as much as 200 minutes of so-called zone 2 cardio per week, movement that you can just barely carry out a conversation, is going to be very useful.

One thing that's often not discussed is that load bearing exercise of some sort is going to be better, provided your body can tolerate it, but you should do something that you can do consistently over those long durations without injuring yourself. But there's a very interesting literature about how load bearing movements actually generate the release of hormones, yes, hormones, from bone that actually cross the blood-brain barrier and may influence health of neurons in brain areas such as the hippocampus. And there, I'm extending from preclinical data in animals to humans, but there's some human data starting to emerge that that's true.

It's also true, and there's a wonderful paper out just recently from Dr. Andy Galpin's lab and collaborators, talking about how if you look at cognitive health, it's highly correlated with things that relate to strength. And that is not to say that you should just do strength training exercises, but we know that all people, truly all people, should be doing some sort of resistance training two or three times per week. We know that grip strength and increasing asymmetry in grip strength between the two hands is one of the indicators of deficits in control from the brain out to the periphery, and it's correlated with cognitive decline. There's also some interesting data about how when the feet become floppy and kind of flaccid, or the lack of ability to extend one's toes — I've been wearing this toe spreader thing. Those hurt. But when you get better at spreading your toes, there's more stability in your feet. You can run and move and do things better without pain. And just as one of the first things that they're going to do when you come into this world is scrape the bottom of your foot and look for the Babinski reflex — which is testing, essentially, the health of the nervous system — an inability to finely control the extremities is certainly a correlate of dementia.

So strength training, cardiovascular training, these are the prime movers against cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease.

There are also interesting data about the use of drugs to increase acetylcholine transmission. I was visiting a Nobel Prize winner at Columbia to learn about his incredible work some years ago and saw that he chewed no fewer than five pieces of Nicorette gum during this short meeting. He said nicotine is protective against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. Decreases in neuromodulation, dopamine, acetylcholine are correlated with cognitive decline. So I'm not encouraging people to take nicotine — it increases blood pressure, vasoconstriction — but some of the emerging cholinergic and dopaminergic drugs are ways to increase acetylcholine and dopamine and are certainly intriguing. And I won't tell you who that person is, but his name is Richard Axel.

## [00:07:07] How Can I Optimize Sleep While Working 24 Hour Shifts?

This probably also pertains to new parents, and it probably also pertains to anyone that's going through a particularly stressful time, where you're micro waking throughout the night. So what do we know? We know, based on really good data, that shift work is bad for us. It's just bad. We're a diurnal species. We're not nocturnal. But thank you, thank you, thank you, shift workers, because you essentially keep us all safe and make the world go round. And so we need you, and we want you healthy.

So one of the main things is that you can make sure that you stay on the same sleep-wake schedule for at least two weeks. It's the swing shift that's really the worst. You can tell your boss I said that. And if you're doing this 24 hour on 48 hour off, there are a couple of things that are really important. First of all, the main way to wake up your nervous system, even though it might not feel like a triple espresso, is going to be light exposure to the eyes. And if you can't get it from sunlight, it's going to be from any bright, artificial light. I'm not a huge proponent of the daylight simulators — they're very expensive. You can simply buy a 900 lux LED far more inexpensively. Or you can just get really close to a bright light. Anytime you're trying to wake up, even if you don't feel that it helps you wake up very much, mostly for the melatonin suppression, because bright light will very acutely suppress melatonin.

And then the real question from shiftworkers always seems to be, should I catch up on sleep, or is that going to be problematic? Should I just stay up into the next cycle? The best answer I can give across the board is: if this is a pattern that you're going to be in regularly, over say months or years, then get whatever sleep you can. Get whatever sleep you can. If it's something that you're doing somewhat acutely, like you're traveling to Europe and you're just going to force yourself to stay up a day and a half, then in that case, I would say no need to get the maximum amount of sleep. Just try and stay with the local schedule.

One thing I will say is that our website, hubermanlab.com, is completely revamped so it's highly searchable. It will take you to exact timestamps, and now you can segregate out timestamps from newsletters. So if you want to say ADHD, Adderall, kids, yes, no, for instance, it will take you to precise timestamps that will address those issues.

## [00:10:17] How Does Hypnosis Therapy Work?

Well, this is a very interesting topic to me because my colleague, Associate Chair of Psychiatry at Stanford, David Spiegel, is a world expert in hypnosis and its neural underpinnings and its use for clinical applications. His father was a hypnotist, also a psychiatrist. And when people hear hypnotism, they think of stage hypnotism and being up on stage and doing things you don't want to in front of other people. But really, when we're talking about clinical applications or wellness applications of hypnosis, we're talking about self-directed hypnosis.

I really wish there was a better name, because I don't think hypnosis is going to advance very far as a field, frankly, because everyone thinks stage hypnosis. It would be like if psychedelics were just called drugs. Hypnosis essentially works by allowing someone to place their own brain into this very unique state. Neuroplasticity involves intense focus followed by deep rest in the form of deep sleep or non-sleep deep rest. Hypnosis is different because hypnosis is a state in which your focus is very narrow, the context is very narrow, but you're very, very relaxed.

David Spiegel and his dad have literally a tool that is approved by the American Psychiatric Association, where they can figure out how hypnotizable you are by having you look up and try and close your eyelids while continuing to look up — the so-called Spiegel eye roll test. The reason is you have cranial nerves that allow you to direct your focus, your eyes, upward, and you have cranial nerves that have your eyes go down. The cranial nerves that drive your eyes up are associated with alertness and eyes open. The cranial nerves associated with pointing your eyes down and closing your eyelids are associated with drowsiness, sleep, and lack of alertness. There's a push-pull in the autonomic nervous system. Spiegel figured out that if somebody can maintain upward gaze while closing their eyelids, that means they're highly hypnotizable, because that is a reflection of the probability that they can enter a brain state in which they are both very awake and very relaxed.

When you are in a state of elevated attention but very relaxed, neuroplasticity occurs much faster because you're essentially marrying the two states that are normally divorced, which are heightened levels of attention first and then deep rest. You're essentially putting the nervous system into a more plastic state. And for people that are highly hypnotizable, the success rates at, for instance, smoking cessation and pain relief, are pretty impressive. Spiegel Lab has published a number of these.

So I think self-hypnosis is a very interesting tool. I just hope that they rename it so that it stands a chance of getting off the ground. This is why I decided to partially rename yoga nidra as non-sleep deep rest. I don't like to do that — yoga nidra has more than a 1,000 year history. But when people hear yoga nidra, unless they are very open-minded, they hear magic carpet, levitation. So non-sleep deep rest, or NSDR, hopefully will persist. The hope is that people will learn to put themselves into brain states that can be adaptive for them.

## [00:17:15] Psychedelics in Clinical Therapy

Psychedelics — well, let's back up a little bit and acknowledge one thing that's more important than psychedelics or anything else when it comes to rewiring the brain, which is that, ultimately, rewiring of the brain is about shifts in neuromodulators: dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine, norepinephrine, acetylcholine. And it's no coincidence that SSRIs, Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors, have been one of the major entry points for attempts to treat things like depression over the last 20 to 30 years.

There's a strong belief that if SSRIs worked, it wasn't because the depressed brain is deficient in serotonin, but rather because increasing serotonin offered the opportunity to increase neuroplasticity. So there's a different way of thinking about it, and that's a segue for saying that when you say psychedelics, that's a broad category of drugs. The sort of classic psychedelics are LSD, Lysergic Acid Diethylamide, and psilocybin, aka mushrooms. The major effect of psilocybin is to stimulate a particular serotonin receptor which has elevated density in particular brain areas.

There are many recent clinical trials — let's say 12 to 20 good sized clinical trials — done in diverse locations on the planet, many at Johns Hopkins and UCSF, some in Switzerland, showing that enhancing the transmission of the release of serotonin and activating particular serotonin receptors leads to an opportunity for more neuroplasticity. The real question is whether or not the experience that one has while under the influence of psychedelics is critical to the clinical outcome. A growing hypothesis is that it's the serotonin itself, and that the things you see, hear, and experience are not relevant.

Kids doing psychedelics seems like a bad idea — their brains are already hypoplastic. If you have a predisposition to bipolar type issues or schizophrenia, it can exacerbate those issues. And certainly, if you don't have adequate support — in the form of somebody that can guide you through the sessions, as well as the pre-sessions and the so-called integration afterwards — it can be a really slippery slope.

Now, several individuals who have had treatment-resistant depression have reported feeling far better after psilocybin therapy, but that psilocybin therapy was done with several pre-sessions, then the psychedelic sessions, then several after sessions. The data on microdosing psilocybin, something that's increasingly popular, is not particularly compelling — it's not clear what it does.

When it comes to MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for the treatment of PTSD, the data I think are more robust, and I think we're likely to see legalization or at least decriminalization in the next few years. But keep in mind that MDMA is methylenedioxymethamphetamine. So approach with caution. Kids, absolutely not. And I think it's an exciting landscape, very exciting, and whereas a discussion like this one would have gotten me fired a few years ago, Stanford has big programs now, a lot of philanthropy, federal grants, and many laboratories focused on the study of psychedelics.

During this same chapter, a question about meditation and sleep came up. We know from a study by Wendy Suzuki — now the Dean of Arts and Sciences at NYU — that even 10 to 13 minutes of meditation has been shown to increase memory and focus, but there are footnotes in those papers which point to the fact that when people meditate too close to bedtime, oftentimes they have trouble sleeping. Meditation is a focusing exercise. If you have trouble sleeping, I recommend doing some sort of non-sleep deep rest practice, like NSDR, aka yoga nidra. Non-sleep deep rest done at any time of day, but especially if you fall asleep in the middle of the night, is going to be useful for helping you fall back asleep.

To finally answer the question: if you meditate, can you afford to sleep less? My friend Matt Walker would say no. However, many of us can't sleep as much as we want to. I'm more of the camp that there are ways you can at least replace the feeling of wakefulness that you would have lost if you don't sleep enough. That's why NSDR became such an attractive tool — 10 or 30 minutes each morning if I didn't sleep enough the night before. I first learned about yoga nidra at an addiction recovery and trauma recovery center in Florida in 2017. One of the tools used there is yoga nidra every morning for 30 minutes. My experience is that 10 to 20 minutes of NSDR, yoga nidra, is sufficient to offset some sleep loss and allow at least me to function, and many people report the same.

## [00:30:23] How Has Your Podcast Changed Your Life?

I wasn't expecting that one. Thank you, Samantha. Well, this is essentially what I've done my whole life. I'm a fairly private person. Believe it or not, I'm pretty introverted. I spend a lot of time alone, and I think that's required for me. I basically have four modes: I'm either readying myself through sleep and NSDR to do one of the other three modes, or I'm either foraging for information, organizing that information, or dispersing that information, or getting ready to do it all over again.

So I think the podcast has been wonderful as an opportunity to share things that I love. It's changed my understanding of what the world is like. I certainly get critique, and that's good. But I was raised by iconoclasts, and particularly my postdoc advisor, Ben Barrus, who encouraged all of us in his lab. I spent the last year of his life recording interviews with him — there's actually a documentary coming out about Ben, and then I'm going to release the audio interviews with Ben, which he approved.

So I suppose the short answer is that I feel very honored with the opportunity. Very, very honored. The major challenges are when things are taken out of context. Being misunderstood doesn't feel good. But at the end of the day, I feel like the luckiest person in the world because I get to spend my time learning. So it's either I'm foraging, I'm organizing, or I'm dispersing information that I also want and that I find incredibly useful. I am somebody who engages on social media. I'm not a post and ghost kind of person. I want to understand. I think that cuttlefish are super interesting, but human beings are super interesting too.

As for fun — people ask me, what do you do for fun? I think people think I do all the protocols. But fun, I like learning. I do enjoy physical movement. For me, it's the little things. The other day, there was a frog in my swimming pool, and I just spent some time looking at him back and forth, and then I had all sorts of ideas about what's he doing, and what's he thinking. I was thinking how Oliver Sacks used to spend time imagining experiencing life as a bat through only echolocation. That exercise of seeing something cool, like a bat, allowed him to use theory of mind, to think what would it be like to have locked-in syndrome, and gave him incredible compassion and sensitivity for other people. So for me, fun is really about doing the things that I do systematically each day, but then when something excites me — I know that feeling, I know it physically in my body — and to just follow that trail.

## [00:35:21] What Do You Feel Is the Next Big Thing in the Health Space?

Thanks for this question. One is non-protein amino acids. It turns out there was a scientist at Stanford, Ed Rubenstein, who passed away at a ripe old age, a brilliant scientist, who talked about, and I had a lot of discussions with when I was a postdoc, about non-protein amino acids. There are certain amino acids, which are non-protein amino acids, that exist in fairly high density in seeds and nuts — which is not to say that seeds and nuts are bad. But non-protein amino acids are similar enough to mammalian protein amino acids that if they are consumed in abundance, and perhaps especially in liquid form, they may be able to incorporate into certain proteins of our tissues, and Ed thought that could lead to misfolding of those proteins and may explain certain forms of neurodegeneration and other neurocognitive challenges. So I think non-protein amino acids are going to be an important discussion.

The other area is the higher level stuff — creativity, abstract reasoning and thought, defining and better understanding the different states that we can go into in waking. And I confess, without a hint of sheepishness about it, that I also think the notion of spirituality and the belief in things that are beyond our current and conscious understanding is super interesting. I think that as a species we've been challenged and conflicted from the beginning. A better understanding of how to navigate all that — this stuff in our skulls, trying to use that very tissue to understand it — I'm intrigued by the possibility that there are certain aspects of self that maybe are not intended to be explored because they are not really of us. Brains interacting with one another is an interesting area, certainly for scientific exploration, but I'm fascinated by the possibility that our species will both understand the mechanics of our emotions, mechanics of our thought process, creativity, and so on, but that we will also allow room for the stuff that we can't explain with science — and to allow room for that in our life experience because I also believe that can be powerful.

I'm friends with Robert Sapolsky, and he's got a great book out called "Determined," so he obviously doesn't believe in free will. But I think there's great value in not trying to control and understand everything and enjoying the mystery of things that are clearly greater than us.

## [00:44:31] Daylight Saving Time: Is It Worth the Productivity Trade-Off?

Daylight saving time is anti-health. It's just dumb. It makes no sense. The director of the Chronobiology Unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health, my good friend and brilliant scientist, Samer Hattar, will tell you it's a stupid idea. It's anti-biology. Increased car crashes, increased heart attacks, increased depression. Kids don't like to wake up early anyway. Parents don't like to wake up early, especially with kids that don't like to wake up early. It makes no sense. And then there are all these arguments about wanting more light in the evening so there's less crime — like, that's totally unsubstantiated.

So the daylight savings thing is just stupid. Basically, try and get as much light in your eyes, ideally from sunlight, early in the day. And if you're worried about cataract — that's a serious concern, macular degeneration — the chair of ophthalmology from Stanford when he came on the podcast verified this: when the sun is low in the sky, you're not really at risk of that. So when the sun is overhead and you're beaming it in your eyes, yeah, it's a problem, but we're talking about viewing low solar angle sunlight in the morning and in the evening. And if there are clouds, do it anyway. In fact, do it longer. And if you can't do that, look at some artificial light inside.

## [00:46:34] Enhancing Neuroplasticity: Strategies for a 19-Year-Old College Student

Rhys, I'm assuming. I don't know who you are or what you're doing, but you're 19. So the cool thing is, your brain is hypoplastic. Life is a psychedelic experience without psychedelics.

People always say, like, if you could go back to your 19-year-old self, what would you do? I would definitely worry less. I would have more fun. I started latching on to practices and the understanding of science as a way — for me, it was kind of like my world felt very unstable, and for me, it brought stability. But you want to avoid rigidity.

When you're 19, learn how you learn. Learn how to focus. Learn how to rest. Basically, you can stress and focus as much as you want as long as you can still fall asleep at night and sleep well and fall back asleep if you wake up. Stress is bad unless you're getting enough sleep, in which case, stress is called learning in life. My direct advice: have some cardiovascular activity you like, have some resistance training activity you like, develop some sort of self-awareness practice like journaling. It could be meditation. Surround yourself with people that you like. Avoid people you don't like.

I think the know thyself thing is huge. Learn to tap into that early feeling of this feels right, this doesn't feel right. Learn to be a bit of a rudder for yourself. And journal. I still have stacks of things that I wrote across the years, most of it is terrible, but you will find if you go back that you kind of knew better all along even if you didn't do better all along. That voice in your head — you have to find your heart, right, or at least not lose it. You have to make sure that you're in touch with that piece of yourself that wasn't judging and just felt good.

And when you're 19, and your neuroplasticity is through the roof, you can do a lot less and get a lot more. I still regret not learning an instrument. The data on people that learn an instrument even later in life, but certainly at 19, is that it greatly increases your ability to learn all sorts of things. So learn an instrument.

## [00:50:17] How Can We Transform the American Education System to Be More Effective?

Oh, so in ten seconds. So when I'm in charge. I am very interested in potentially informing policy. If I were to ever be asked, I'd certainly respond. And my stance on this is much in the same vein as the podcast, because during the deep 2020 and 2021 pandemic, I realized there was a lot of circadian disruption, anxiety, stress, a bunch of things happening with visual systems and biological systems that I felt there were tools that people could, perhaps, benefit from. So I started putting that information into the world, and I was really surprised that people that I knew from the neuroscience community, for instance at NIMH or in government positions, weren't talking about this stuff, so I just kept doing it.

The education system, in my mind, should at least involve some sort of discussion early on about this thing called the brain, this thing called the body, how they work, how you can do certain things to modulate your stress level, your sleep — not just the importance of sleep and nutrition and avoiding social isolation and all these important things, but giving people some levers and knobs to maneuver within themselves and zero cost tools as a way to do that that transcend socioeconomic boundaries, ideally transcend language as well. I think the education system should start, in my opinion, with teaching kids how to understand themselves, what to do in difficult scenarios that's really anchored in the real pillars of biology and psychology, and take some of the mystery out of trying to navigate the tough business of growing up.

So I think that was our last question. Thank you all for coming tonight.

## [00:54:06] Conclusion

Forgive me for going long. I do want to say thank you, sincere thank you for making your way out here, especially on a weekday night. Thanks for your hospitality. My incredible team, I want to thank them. And certainly, last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. Thank you. Thank you so much.
