---
title: "Controlling Sugar Cravings & Metabolism with Science-Based Tools | Huberman Lab Podcast #64"
type: transcript
episode_date: 2022-03-21
episode_number: 64
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
youtube_id: VAEzZeaV5zM
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:00] Sugar & Physiology

Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss sugar, in particular, how our nervous system regulates our sugar intake and our seeking of sugar. We're also going to discuss how sugar regulates our nervous system. And as you'll soon learn, sugar really impacts our brain and body by two main mechanisms.

One of those mechanisms is based on the sweet taste of sugar, which itself is rewarding. Even if you're not much of a sweet tooth, I confess I'm not, most people enjoy sweet tastes more than bitter tastes. And the sweet taste of sugar and its various forms, is strongly reinforcing, meaning it triggers the activation of neurons, nerve cells in the brain and body, that make us want to consume more of that sweet substance. Incidentally, sweet tastes also make us want to eat more of other substances as well. You may be familiar with that phenomenon.

Now sugar also triggers mechanisms in the brain and body based on its nutritive content, independent of its sweetness. What that means is that the actual caloric content and the way that sugar interacts with your nervous system at a subconscious level, without your awareness, also impacts your craving and seeking of sugar and other foods. Today, we are going to discuss what happens when you ingest sugar in terms of your body's reaction and your brain's reaction. We are also going to talk about what happens when you don't ingest enough sugar. Because it turns out sugar is such a powerful fuel for the brain that under conditions where people don't ingest enough sugar, or where their so-called blood glucose, which is basically blood sugar of a particular form, gets too low, their neurons don't function as well.

That said, there are conditions of very low blood sugar in which neurons can function even better. So today we are going to talk about the ins and outs, the ups and downs of sugar as it relates to your nervous system. And by the end of this episode, I'm confident that you will have a much clearer picture as to how much sugar you should be ingesting, whether or not you should avoid sugars that you're currently eating, and you will certainly understand much, much more about the energy and fuel sources that your brain relies on, which I'm certain will allow you to make better informed choices about the foods you eat and avoid toward mental health, physical health, and performance.

## [00:02:25] The Brain-Body Contract

I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events this May. The first live event will be hosted in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second live event will be hosted in Portland, Oregon on May 18th. Both are part of a lecture series entitled The Brain-Body Contract, during which I will discuss science and science based tools for mental health, physical health and performance. And I should point out that while some of the material I'll cover will overlap with information covered here on the Huberman Lab Podcast, and on various social media posts, most of the information I will cover is going to be distinct from information covered on the podcast or elsewhere.

So once again, it's Seattle on May 17th, Portland on May 18th, you can access tickets by going to Hubermanlab.com/tour. And I hope to see you there. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.

## [00:03:13] Thesis, AG1 (Athletic Greens), InsideTracker

It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes what are called nootropics, which means smart drugs.

Now, to be honest, I am not a fan of the term nootropics, I don't believe in smart drugs in the sense that I don't believe that there's any one substance or collection of substances that can make us smarter. I do believe, based on science, however, that there are particular neural circuits and brain functions that allow us to be more focused, more alert, access creativity, be more motivated, et cetera. That's just the way that the brain works, different neural circuits for different brain states. And so the idea of a nootropic that's to make us smarter all around, fails to acknowledge that smarter is many things. If you're an artist, you're a musician, you're doing math, you're doing accounting, at different parts of the day, you need to be creative.

These are all different brain processes. Thesis understands this. And as far as I know they're the first nootropics company to create targeted nootropics for specific outcomes. They only use the highest quality ingredients, which of course is essential. Some of those I've talked about on the podcast, things like DHA, Ginkgo biloba, phosphatidylserine.

They give you the ability to try several different blends over the course of a month, discover which nootropics work best for your unique brain chemistry and genetics and goals. And with that personalization, design a kit of nootropics that's ideal for the different brain and body states you want to access. I've been using Thesis for more than six months now, and I can confidently say that their nootropics have been a total game changer. My go-to formula is the Clarity Formula, or sometimes I'll use their Energy Formula, before training. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman. Take a three minute quiz and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout for 10% off your first order.

Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens, now called AG1. Athletic Greens is an all in one vitamin, mineral and probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is that it helps me cover all of my basic nutritional needs. It makes up for any deficiencies that I might have. In addition, it has probiotics, which are vital for microbiome health. I've done a couple of episodes now on the so-called gut microbiome and in the ways in which the microbiome interacts with your immune system, with your brain to regulate mood, and essentially with every biological system relevant to health throughout your brain and body. With Athletic Greens, I get the vitamins I need, the minerals I need, and the probiotics to support my microbiome.

If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road. Plus a year's supply of Vitamin D3+K2. There are a ton of data now showing that vitamin D3 is essential for various aspects of our brain and body health. Even if we're getting a lot of sunshine, many of us are still deficient in vitamin D3. And K2 is also important because it regulates things like cardiovascular function, calcium in the body, and so on. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer of the five free travel packs and the year's supply of Vitamin D3+K2.

Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long term health can only be assessed with a quality blood test. What's unique about InsideTracker is that while there are a lot of different tests out there for hormones and metabolic factors, et cetera, with InsideTracker, you get the numbers back in terms of your levels, but they also give you very clear directives in terms of lifestyle, nutrition, and supplementation, that can help you bring those values into the ranges that are best for you and your health goals. And that's very different than a lot of the other programs where you get a lot of information, but you don't really know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes that all very easy to understand and very actionable based on the very easy to use dashboard at InsideTracker. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout.

Okay, let's talk about sugar, let's talk about how sugar impacts your brain.

## [00:07:40] Sugar & the Brain

And how your brain impacts your pursuit or your avoidance of sugar. Let's get a few things out of the way first. The first thing is that there's nothing inherently bad about sugar. I know the word sugar gets a bad rap nowadays, and indeed, you're going to hear over and over again, during this podcast, that consuming a lot of refined sugars, in particular high fructose corn syrup, is known to have a very large number of bad effects on the brain and body. I don't know that there's anyone that really debates that anymore.

Even if we just agree, and I think we should all agree, on the so-called calories in, calories out principle, it's a principle of thermodynamics that if we ingest more energy than we burn, we are going to gain weight. If we ingest less energy than we burn, we are generally going to lose weight. And if the two things are in balance, ingestion and burning of energy, well, then we're going to maintain weight. So everyone agrees on that, I agree on that.

But beyond that, there are a number of ways in which particular nutrients, in the case of today's episode, sugar, impact the way that the brain works, such that we tend to seek out more of particular nutrients. For instance, if we eat sugar, there are two, or at least two mechanisms, by which we will crave more sugar. I think most people are aware of that experience, but today I'm going to explain exactly how that works. But also that when we ingest sugar it has a bunch of different effects on the way that our neural circuits work that can allow us to be more or less focused, more or less agitated, more or less happy, more or less depressed in some cases.

So today, as we explore this thing we're calling sugar, we are going to explore that mainly in the context of the nervous system, but also in the context of how the nervous system regulates many, many functions and behaviors that are important to all of you — your ability to think, your ability to exercise, your ability to gain weight, lose weight, whatever your goals might happen to be, sugar plays a critical role in achieving those goals. And in some cases, if you're ingesting too much at the wrong times or the wrong forms, sugar can actually impede those goals. In fact, sugar can prevent all the right behaviors from allowing you to achieve the goals that you want. So today we are going to place sugar into its proper context. The way I want to start off by doing that is to tell you a little bit of what happens when we eat and a little bit of what the brain does.

## [00:10:06] Appetite & Hormones: Ghrelin & Insulin

So what happens when we eat? Well, I've done an entire episode on metabolism. So if you're interested in the full cascade of hormonal and neural events that occurs when we eat, please check out that episode. But for the sake of today's discussion, let's just take a top contour view of the hormonal response to ingesting food.

Now, anytime we eat, that is the consequence of a number of things that happened before we ate. There's a hormone in our brain and body called Ghrelin, spelled G-H-R-E-L-I-N. Ghrelin is a hormone that increases depending on how long it's been since we ate last. So the longer it's been since we had a meal, Ghrelin levels are going to be higher and higher, and it essentially makes us hungry by interacting with particular neurons in an area of the brain called the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus and some other areas as well, like the lateral hypothalamus. Ghrelin increases, it tends to make us hungry. And then when we eat, typically what happens is Ghrelin levels go down. So it's a very logical system.

Now, when we eat, assuming that we eat carbohydrates, but even if we just eat some protein and some fats, we will experience a slight, or in some cases, a large rise in blood glucose — blood glucose is simply blood sugar. And the body and brain, we should say in particular, the nervous system doesn't function well if blood sugar is too high or too low. So as a consequence, we have another hormone, which is released from the pancreas, which is called insulin, which helps regulate the amount of glucose in the bloodstream.

So even if you were to ingest an entire cup, an eight ounce cup of pure table sugar, which would send your blood glucose very, very high, assuming that you have a normal insulin response, that you're not diabetic, that insulin response would help clamp that blood glucose level so that it did not cause damage to your brain and body. Because if blood sugar goes too high, it's actually toxic to neurons and other cells of your body, it can kill them off. And neurons of the central nervous system, meaning the brain and spinal cord, once they are dead, they do not come back. So your biological systems understand this at a biological level, and prevent that death of cells due to high blood sugar, by keeping insulin around, in order to clamp blood glucose. Diabetics, we call them type one diabetics, who don't make insulin, have to take insulin when they eat, in particular when they eat foods that raise their blood sugar, specifically to avoid that neurotoxicity and the other deleterious effects of high blood sugar.

So Ghrelin is a hormone that goes up the longer it's been since we've eaten, it tends to stimulate hunger. When we eat, Ghrelin is suppressed. Blood glucose typically goes up, especially when we eat a carbohydrate containing meal. When blood glucose goes up, it's regulated in the body, meaning its peaks and its valleys are more or less smoothed out, and that glucose is sequestered, it's taken away where it needs to be taken away. And in certain locations, it's delivered to cells so that those cells can use the glucose.

Now, one of the chief organs for glucose utilization is the brain. Neurons are tremendously metabolically active. And their preferred mode of metabolism is glucose metabolism. In other words, neurons basically run on sugar, which is not to say that you should eat a lot of sugar. As you'll see today, there are states of mind and body, for instance fasted states, in which people report having immense amounts of mental clarity and their blood glucose is actually quite low. So it is simply not the case that the more sugar that you ingest, the better that your brain will function.

But it is the case that for most people, meaning people who are not on a ketogenic or very low carbohydrate diet, neurons in their brain and body are using glucose in order to function. That's what allows those neurons to fire electrical potentials — that's how we refer to it, firing, meaning sending electrical signals down their length to communicate with other neurons. To illustrate just how important glucose is for brain function, I'd like to describe a study that just recently came out.

## [00:14:17] Glucose & Brain Function

That study sits on a long history of similar studies. But the one that just came out is particularly interesting. Now I want to point out that, unless I say otherwise, I'm going to refer to typical diets, meaning I have to believe that most people out there are ingesting some starch or carbohydrate. I do realize there are people following very low carbohydrate diets or moderately low carbohydrate diets. I even know that there are some folks out there who are on the so-called carnivore diet — they only eat meat and organs, maybe a little fruit.

But I'm going to assume that the vast majority of people listening ingest proteins and carbohydrates. So unless I say ketogenic, or I emphasize ketosis itself, which I will, I'm referring to a kind of typical diet where people are consuming fats, proteins and carbohydrates. I count myself as one such individual. At some point I might try the carnivore diet, who knows, I might try a pure vegan diet, who knows. But for my entire life up until now, I'm 46 years old, I've been a proud omnivore, meaning I've tried to eat high quality, as much as I can, unprocessed foods; I try and really avoid highly processed foods.

But I do eat from those three macronutrient groups — proteins, carbohydrates, and fats — and I'm going to assume that most of you do as well. The study I'd like to emphasize recorded from neurons, nerve cells, in the brain, in particular in the part of the brain that responds to visual images, the so-called visual cortex. And neurons in the visual cortex are beautifully tuned, as we say, to particular features of what we see. The primary example of this, the kind of classic example, is if you put a little electrode next to a neuron in your visual cortex, or if we put you into an fMRI scanner machine, which can detect neural activity, and I were to show you a bunch of just little lines — bars of light, they could be dark bars of light, they could be light bars of light, on a screen in front of you — some would be vertical, some would be horizontal, some would be at 45 degrees. What we would see is that some neurons respond best, meaning they fire a lot of electrical activity to vertical lines, other ones respond to horizontal lines, and others respond to 45 degree lines.

And this so-called orientation tuning, because of the orientation of the line, is a cardinal classic feature of the way that your visual system is built. And everything that you see, whether it's a face or a dog or a cat or a landscape, is built up from these very simple neuron responses. In other words, when you look at a face, there are neurons deep in the brain that respond to faces. But the only reason that those neurons can respond to those faces is because they receive signals from neurons in your visual cortex — some of which respond to vertical lines, some of which respond to horizontal lines, and some which respond to 45 degree lines. And all of those are built up in what we call a hierarchical representation, which is just fancy language for those are the building blocks by which you see a face and you recognize a face.

Experimentally, it's quite straightforward to measure how sharply tuned one of these neurons is. In other words, if I were to show you a vertical line and find a neuron in your brain that responds to vertical lines, I could also ask whether or not that neuron fires any electrical activity in response to a line that's not quite vertical, maybe just 10 degrees off vertical or 20 degrees or 30 degrees. And what I eventually would find is that that neuron was orientation-tuned over a particular range of angles.

In the recent experiment that was published in the journal Neuron, a Cell Press journal, the authors asked a really interesting question: they asked whether or not the sharpness of tuning, the precision of orientation tuning of these neurons, is dependent on blood glucose level. What they found is that when subjects are well fed, neurons that responded to vertical responded very strongly to vertical, but not very much at all to other angles — to lines that are 10 degrees or 20 degrees off. If they looked at neurons that were primarily tuned to horizontal lines, they found the same thing. What they basically found was the sharpness, the precision of tuning of neurons in the brain, was best when subjects were fed. And conversely, when subjects were fasted, the orientation tuning of these neurons became much broader. What it meant was that a neuron that normally would only respond to vertical now responded to other angles of lines as well.

You might say, well, that's great, right, these neurons that at one point could only do one thing are now tuned to other things. But it's not so great because what that means is that in the fasted state, your perception of the outside world is actually distorted, it's blurred, it's not as precise as it is when you're fed. And when I say fed, what I really mean is when glucose is available to neurons.

Now, for some of you, maybe many of you, including myself, intermittent fasting, or some variant thereof, is actually a state that I like. It allows me to focus. For instance, I tend to eat my first meal sometime around 11:00 AM. And then I generally eat my last meal sometime around 8:00 PM, plus or minus an hour on either side. In the morning, I tend to be most focused. And I always associated that with the fact that I was fasted. I ingest water and some caffeine about 90 minutes after waking up. When you are in a fasted state, typically you are going to use fuels that are available to the neurons, based on your intake of food the day before — maybe you're using some glycogen, maybe you're using some fat, maybe you're using some blood sugar derived from other storage sites in the body.

What's interesting about this study is that the study says that when well fed, meaning when blood glucose is at a properly elevated level in the bloodstream, it can be delivered to the brain in a way that allows neurons to work best. This is really all just to underscore the point that your nervous system is extremely metabolically demanding, and it loves glucose. So the takeaway from this study is not that you should avoid fasting; the takeaway is that there are elements of the fasted state — in particular the elevations in things like epinephrine and norepinephrine, also called adrenaline and noradrenaline — that can give us this kind of clarity of mind that many people are pursuing when they fast. But ultimately, your brain as an organ, is a glucose consuming machine.

Now, when you eat a food, that food is broken down and if it contains carbohydrates, it's going to be converted into glucose. And that glucose can't get directly into the brain as a fuel source. It actually has to be carried across the so-called blood-brain barrier, the BBB, and the actual metabolism of glucose and the delivery of the glucose to the neurons is carried out by a different cell type. And it's a cell type that you should all know about because it's the most abundant cell type in your brain, and maybe even in your entire nervous system — and that's the so-called astrocyte.

Astrocytes are one of several types of glia — the word glia means glue. But many people have taken that name to think that the only thing that the astrocytes are doing is just kind of holding things together. Actually, the astrocytes are involved in delivering glucose to the neurons; they are critically involved in shaping your neuronal function and brain plasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience. So these astrocytes are like little waiters and waitresses bringing glucose to the neurons, and the neurons are going to do the heavy lifting that's involved in perception and behavior and action.

So if prior to this episode, you didn't already realize that glucose, blood sugar, is vital to the function of your brain and other neurons of your nervous system, now you know. And for those of you that have experienced the increase in mental clarity that comes after a properly timed, properly composed, and properly sized meal, well then now you have justification for eating something as a way to improve the way that your brain works. It turns out that your brain is going to work best when it's got glucose available, whether you like to fast or not, that's just the reality of things. The same thing is also true for the neurons in your body.

## [00:24:19] Glucose & Physical Activity

The way you are able to perform exercise or movement of any kind for that matter, is because neurons called motor neurons send electrical potentials to the muscle fibers. They release a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine, which causes contraction in the muscle fibers, and allows you to move your limbs. Those neurons are also very metabolically demanding, especially when you're doing demanding types of physical work, and that could be cycling or running or weightlifting or yoga or whatever it may be. Those neurons require a ton of glucose.

If you've ever had the experience of having to think very hard about how you're generating a movement or force yourself to continue to endure in a given exercise, you might have thought, oh, you know, I'm running out of fuel, that's why I'm getting tired, it's hard to do. That's actually the case sometimes, but that's not always the case. One of the reasons that it feels like work is because your so-called upper motor neurons, the ones that control the lower motor neurons in your spinal cord which control your muscles, have to be very metabolically active.

It's one thing to engage in a reflexive movement where you're just walking around or if you're running continuously. But when you suddenly have to focus on what you're doing and generate specific patterns of motor movement, well, that feels demanding because it increases the release of adrenaline in your brain and body, which makes you feel a little bit agitated and more alert. But also deliberate thought — deliberately controlling the way that your brain and body is moving — requires more glucose uptake, more energy in those very neurons. And this is also why after doing a long bout of exercise, you might be tired. But also if you do a bout of skill learning of any kind, or if you've been reading and thinking about what you're reading, or if you had an intense conversation with somebody where you're really forcing yourself to listen and really trying to parse what they're saying, that's work, and that work requires glucose uptake by neurons, both in the brain and in your body.

## [00:26:16] Fructose vs. Glucose

Now that we've established that glucose is the preferred source of fuel for the nervous system, I'd like to concentrate on a few of the other types of sugars that we ingest on a common basis, and the impact that those have on brain function and body function. I'd particularly like to focus on fructose. Fructose, of course, is found in fruit; it's also found in the infamous high fructose corn syrup, which we will talk about today. It's worth pointing out that the concentrations of fructose in fruit is quite low compared to the concentrations of fructose in high fructose corn syrup. High fructose corn syrup is approximately 50% fructose, which turns out to be an enormously high percentage, especially when we contrast that to the concentrations of fructose in fruit.

Fruits have other types of sugars in them as well. The sucrose content of most fruit and fruit juices is low. Although there are some fruits like melons, peaches, pineapples, and so forth, that contain a little less than 10% or so of sucrose. Things like mangoes can have a lot of sucrose. But typically the amount of fructose is anywhere from 1% to about 10%.

The point that I'd like to make is that fructose as a sugar is handled very differently in the body than is glucose. But I also want to emphasize that because the percentage of fructose in fruit is rather low, especially compared to high fructose corn syrup, many people have demonized fructose saying that fructose makes you fat, or that fruit makes you fat. If you look at the data, that's not really the case. The fact of the matter is that the concentrations of fructose in fruit are so low that unless someone is consuming a lot of fruit, or they're consuming a lot of fruit on the backdrop of a highly processed diet, you can't really say that fructose is fattening.

Now high fructose corn syrup is a different issue, and too much consumption of anything, fructose included, whether or not it comes from fruit or otherwise, can be a problem for the ways that it impacts the neural circuits that process sugar, not just glucose, but fructose. One of the key distinctions between glucose and fructose is that fructose most likely cannot directly access the brain. It actually needs to be converted into glucose in the liver. And the way that conversion occurs feeds back to a set of hormones and neural pathways that we talked about earlier, which have a lot to do with appetite.

And to just summarize what is now a lot of very solid data, fructose — and specifically fructose — has the ability to reduce certain hormones and peptides in our body whose main job is to suppress Ghrelin. As you recall, Ghrelin is a hormone that increases the longer it's been since we've eaten, and Ghrelin makes us hungry by stimulating particular neurons in our hypothalamus — it actually makes us really want to eat, and in particular, really makes us want to eat sugary and fatty foods. Fructose reduces the activity of the hormones that reduce Ghrelin. And so the net consequence of that is that fructose increases Ghrelin.

So, although I and pretty much everyone out there agrees that calories in and calories out is the fundamental principle of weight loss, weight maintenance, or weight gain — ingesting fructose shifts our hormone system, and as a consequence, our neural pathways within our brain, the hypothalamus, to be hungrier regardless of how many calories we've eaten. Now I also want to be absolutely clear: this does not mean that eating an apple or eating a melon or eating a couple of apricots is going to make you hyperphagic — meaning it's going to make you just want to eat, eat, and eat. That's simply not the case. But if you compare fructose and glucose, not only are they metabolized differently in the brain and body, but in addition to that, fructose has this impact of reducing the hormones that reduce hunger hormones in neural circuits.

So fructose does have this kind of twist in its phenotype. Because fructose itself, while it's actually a pretty good fuel source in many ways and it's often packaged in things like fruits, which bring along fiber and vitamins and minerals, it can suppress the pathways that suppress hunger. And as a consequence, it can increase hunger. So current recommendations for most people are to eat more fruits and vegetables. But for those of you that are trying to control your hunger, ingesting a lot of fruit is probably not going to be a good idea. Certainly, ingesting it from high fructose corn syrup is not going to be a good idea because of the enormous percentages of fructose in high fructose corn syrup — 50%, or sometimes even more.

But even from fruit, some people will find that fruit really quenches their appetite. Other people will find that fruit stimulates their appetite. So fructose provides a bridge for us between a particular kind of sugar, hormone function — in this case Ghrelin and the hypothalamus — which leads us to the next question.

## [00:32:41] When to Eat High-Sugar Foods?

What is it about sugar that makes it such an attractive thing for us? Why do we like it so much? And the obvious answer that most people arrive at is, well, it just tastes really, really good. But that's actually not the way it works. The rewarding properties of sugar, whether or not they come in the form of sucrose or fructose or foods that increase glucose to a very high level, is not just related to the taste of the foods that produce that elevation in glucose, sucrose, or fructose.

It is in part, but that's only part of the story. And the rest of the story, once you understand it, can actually place you in a position to much better control your sugar intake of all kinds, but also your food intake in ways that can allow you to make much better choices about the foods you ingest. And actually at this point, I should probably give a confession. I've said today, and I'll say it again, I don't have much of a sweet tooth and indeed that's true. I can kind of pass on chocolate or ice cream or things like that, and it seems like with each successive year, sweet things are less and less appealing to me.

But there's probably one exception and that's mangoes. And it turns out that mangoes have the highest percentage of sugar in them, in particular fructose, as well as other forms of sugars. So what I do, because I love mango so much, is I will have mangoes probably twice a week, but I'll have them after some sort of resistance training or hard run or something like that. Because it is the case that after you exercise hard, in particular exercise that is of the high intensity variety, your body is more efficient at using circulating sugar — it's able to store that or use that for fuel.

So now I want to take us on a journey into the nervous system to explain the pathways in the brain and body.

## [00:35:01] Sugar's Taste vs. Nutritive Pathways, Sugar Cravings

That regulate our appetite for sugar. Now, keep in mind what I already told you before, which is that when we ingest foods, they're broken down into various components and glucose is going to be shuttled to the brain, and of course, to other neurons in our spinal cord and elsewhere, and to our muscles, in order for all of those cells and organs and tissues to be able to function. The fact that so many cells and organs and tissues require glucose in order to function has led to a situation where you have dedicated neural machinery — pieces of your brain — that are almost entirely, if not entirely devoted, to seeking out sugar or foods that contain sugars. And to make sure that you not only seek those out, but you know where those foods are and that you ingest more and more and more of them. And there are two main ways that these neural circuits work.

In fact, we can see that there are two neural circuits entirely that work in parallel. And this is a common theme throughout the nervous system — parallel pathways. Parallel pathways are the ways that you can distinguish light from dark; parallel pathways are the ways that you can distinguish high pitched sounds from low pitched sounds; parallel pathways are the ways that you can flex your muscles versus extend your muscles. For every function in your body that you might think is controlled by one brain area or one neural circuit, almost always there are two or more so-called parallel pathways that ensure that that particular behavior happens.

Now, in the case of sugar consumption, the two parallel pathways involve one pathway related to the actual taste and the perception of taste — that lead, not just you, but every animal that we're aware of, to seek more sweet containing foods. The other parallel pathway is related to the nutritive component of sweet foods, meaning the degree to which a given food will raise blood glucose. I want to repeat that. One pathway in your brain and body is devoted to getting you to seek out sweet tasting things that you perceive as sweet, and another parallel pathway is devoted to getting you to seek out foods that lead to increases in blood glucose.

It just so happens that the foods that lead to big increases in blood glucose typically are associated with that sweet taste. Now, this is distinctly different than the neural pathways that control seeking of savory foods or salty foods or spicy foods. The sweet pathway is what we would call hardwired. It exists, as far as we know, in every mammal, it even exists in fruit flies — hence fruit fly.

Basically, getting sweet stuff into the body might seem like it has a lot to do with the taste, but it has just as much to do with the nutritive components that sweet tasting foods carry, and the fact that your nervous system and so many cells in your brain and body run on glucose. When you think you want a piece of chocolate or you think you want a piece of cake or you're craving something sweet, you are both craving the taste and your neurons are literally craving the nutritive components that arrive with that taste. And simply by understanding that can allow you to circumvent some of the sugar cravings that you might otherwise be a complete hopeless victim to.

Also in this episode, I will talk about ways that you can sort of undermine or short circuit these circuits, in order to reduce sugar cravings on a regular basis, if that's your goal. Two parallel pathways: one of the parallel pathways has to do with conscious perception. Animals of all kinds — mice, rats and humans — will prefer sugary taste to non-sugary taste. When we eat something that tastes sweet, we register that sweet taste by way of sweet receptors — literally little ports or portals of neurons on our tongue and on our palate. A lot of people don't realize this, but there are a lot of taste receptors on the soft palate and around the mouth, on the sides of the mouth. So you're actually tasting things, not just with your tongue, but with your entire mouth and your palate.

So when you ingest something sweet, very quickly there are signals sent from those neurons in your mouth to brain areas that cause you to seek out, or at least pay attention to, the source and the abundance of those sweet things. They literally change your perception. In fact, there are beautiful neuroimaging studies that show that when people ingest a sugary drink, their perception of images of foods changes very much to make those foods appear more appetizing — and not just foods that contain sugar. Results of those studies do show that there's an increase in the perception of detail in images of ice cream after you ingest a sweet drink, or even if you put a hard candy into your mouth, it will make you seek out sugary things more and make sugary things look more appetizing, but also other foods more appetizing.

So I think it's important that people recognize that fact, that when you have a sweet taste in your mouth, your perception has immediately shifted. These are fast neural pathways that shift your entire self toward seeking more sugary stuff and more food generally.

## [00:41:46] Tool: Sugar & the Dopamine, Pleasure – Pain Dichotomy

And the way it does that is through dopamine — probably if you're a listener to this podcast, now an old friend, but an incredible neuromodulator. Dopamine is a molecule that is released from several places in the brain. There's a so-called mesolimbic reward pathway, which is a whole set of places in the brain or circuits, designed to get us motivated and craving and in pursuit of things. And then of course there are areas of the brain that are involved in movement that are linked up with those areas involved in motivation. That makes perfect sense. Why would you have a brain area involved in motivation if you couldn't actually do something with that motivation?

So the way that your brain is designed is: when there's an increase in dopamine in the mesolimbic reward pathway, there are signals sent to an area of the brain called the striatum. It's got a dorsal part, meaning an upper part, and a ventral part, which means a lower part. And the dopamine sent to those areas places us into modes of action to pursue particular things. Sugar or sweet tastes, to be more specific, have an incredibly potent ability to activate dopamine release within the mesolimbic reward pathway. This has been shown over and over and over again in animal models and in humans. This is especially true, I should mention, through the ingestion of sweet liquids.

When we ingest something sweet, the perception of that sweet taste increases dopamine in the mesolimbic reward pathways, which then are conveyed to pathways for motor behavior, and in general, place us into modes of focused action toward getting more of whatever was sweet.

Again, for those of you that are very disciplined, you can probably eat that one piece of chocolate and be just fine. But if you understand the way that dopamine works, what you'll realize is that when this dopamine pathway is triggered, it tends to create not the sensation or the perception of satiety — of feeling like something is enough — but rather to produce the sensation of wanting more. As described in the episode that I hosted with my colleague from Stanford School of Medicine, Dr. Anna Lembke — she's an expert on addiction and dopamine pathways — the dopamine circuits of the brain have what we call a pleasure-pain balance. And that's paraphrasing what Dr. Anna Lembke has said, and has written about in her beautiful book, "Dopamine Nation." If you haven't read that book, I highly recommend it.

In that book, and of course within research articles, you will find evidence of this so-called pleasure-pain balance that exists within our dopamine circuits. Nobody has dopamine circuits that allow them to escape this pleasure-pain balance. And the way this works is that anytime that we engage in a behavior or we ingest something that increases our levels of dopamine, there is a subsequent increase in the neural circuits that control our sense of frustration, pain, and lack.

You can actually notice this phenomenon if, for instance, you're somebody who really likes chocolate. Pay attention to the way that you experience indulging in that thing. If you eat that piece of chocolate and you really focus on savoring its amazing taste, you'll notice that it provides some quenching of your desire for sweet stuff or chocolate or both, but right as you stop experiencing that, right as that chocolate intake tapers off, as you swallow it down your throat, or you just pause for a second afterwards, what you'll notice is that your brain and body actually orient toward wanting more. And that wanting of more is really the action of the neural circuits that underlie pain and are pushing your dopamine levels back down.

Now the way these pleasure-pain circuits work is very diabolical. Because it turns out that were you to take another piece of chocolate, yes, your dopamine levels would go back up, but not to the same extent that they did the first bite of chocolate that you had. In fact, we can say that the longer it's been since you've indulged in something that you really enjoy or would like, the greater the dopamine you will experience when you finally engage in that behavior or indulge in that thing, and the greater the dopamine increase, the greater the subsequent action of those pain circuits. So this puts you on a very complicated seesaw.

Which is not to say you shouldn't have a piece of chocolate, it's just to say that the sweet taste of sweet things in particular — things that we crave very much and we wait and wait and wait, and then we allow ourselves to indulge — trigger changes in our neurochemistry, in our neuro circuits, that place us in a very vulnerable place, to either want more and more of that thing or to seek out other ways to fill that kind of emptiness.

Now again, I'm not saying that you shouldn't pursue pleasurable things. This molecule dopamine exists for a reason. But once you understand the way these dopamine pathways work, you can leverage them to your advantage as opposed to them leveraging you to their advantage.

## [00:48:43] Subconscious Sugar Circuits, Hidden Sugars in Food

When you ingest something sweet, you perceive that sweet taste and a cascade ensues within your brain that makes you want more of the sweet thing. That's the conscious pathway for sugar perception, for sweet perception. Now there's the second pathway. The second pathway is what's called the post-ingestive reinforcing properties of sugar, which is really just a fancy nerd-speak way of saying there are events that happen within your stomach and below your conscious detection, that are also driving you to seek out sweet tasting things independent of their taste, and foods that increase blood glucose, independent of their taste.

In order to illustrate the immense power of these subconscious circuits for sugar seeking, I'd like to describe an experiment. And this is just one experiment of many, of dozens or more experiments done in animal models and humans, which essentially illustrate the same thing. I'll provide a link to this study in the caption. The first author is Freeman. The paper was published in Frontiers in Bioscience. But there have been others — papers in Nature Neuroscience, papers in Neuron, Cell Press journals — many, many journals, many, many papers.

If subjects are given the choice of drinking plain water or a sweet tasting fluid, their preference for the sweet tasting fluid is much, much higher, right? Sweet tastes better than plain water, at least for most people and certainly for animals. Now, if you take an animal which completely lacks sweet receptors — and you can do this through some molecular genetic tools in the laboratory, we call these knockout mice, where you can knock out a particular receptor for sweet taste — you can confirm that there's no perception of sweet things or at least no preference for sweet things in those animals. In humans, you can numb the mouth; there are other pharmacologic ways that you can eliminate sweet receptors in the mouth. And by doing that, people will tell you they can't taste anything sweet.

If you eliminate the perception of sweet taste in the mouth and you offer people or laboratory animals water versus some sugar-containing solution, you eliminate the preference for the sugary solution. This tells us that the perception of sweet is important for the preference for sweet tasting drinks. However, in both animal models and in humans, after about 15 minutes, subjects start preferring the sugary water, even though they can't taste that it is sweeter.

So this experiment is so crucial because what it says is that the preference for sugar containing foods is in part due to the sweetness of those foods, but in part due to something else. And this something else is what we call the post-ingestive effect — and as I mentioned before, it took about 15 minutes. You've actually experienced this, whether you realize it or not. This phenomenon of post-ingestive rewarding properties of sweet foods — meaning what happens in your body when you ingest something that increases your blood glucose very much — has no doubt controlled you from the inside, below your awareness, and you didn't realize it.

And here's how it works. We all have neurons within our gut. These neurons have a name, they're called neuropod cells. Neuropod cells were famously discovered by Professor Dr. Diego Bohorquez at Duke University. And these cells respond to, among other things, to the presence of sugar within the gut. So when we ingest a sugary food or drink, or we ingest a food or drink that simply contains fructose, sucrose, glucose, or some other form of sugar that later, through metabolism, will be converted into glucose, the neuropod cells are able to register the presence of those sweet or glucose-stimulating foods. And in response to that, send electrical signals up to the brain via the so-called vagus nerve.

The vagus nerve, of course, being a nerve pathway, famous for its role in relaxation. That's kind of the assumption out there — that it's always involved in relaxation. That's not the case. It's involved in a lot of things besides relaxation. But nonetheless, these neuropod cells send electrical signals through a particular highway within the vagus to the so-called nodose ganglion — a ganglion is just a cluster of neurons — and then the nodose ganglion sends on information to the nucleus of the solitary tract. These neuropod cells also trigger activation of dopamine pathways within the mesolimbic reward pathway.

In other words, there are signals conveyed from the gut — meaning stomach and intestines — to the brain anytime we ingest sweet foods, but it has nothing to do with our perception of them being sweet. It has everything to do with the fact that sweetness of food is almost always correlated with an ability to increase blood glucose. And the net effect of this is a parallel pathway by which dopamine is increased further.

The experiment I described before of animals or humans ingesting something that contains sugar but not being able to perceive its sweetness, and yet after a period of time still preferring that food or drink to non-sugar containing food or drinks, is dependent on these neuropod cells and related pathways. What this means for you is that anytime you eat something sweet, that substance is actually causing your gut — your stomach and your intestines — to be more precise, that substance is causing the neuropod cells in your stomach and intestines to send a parallel set of signals up to your brain saying eat more of that, or simply eat more, eat more, eat more, and preferably eat more sweet foods.

So we've all heard of hidden sugars, meaning the sugars that manufacturers have put into foods and disguised them with other flavors. I talked about this in the episode on salt — using salt to mask the taste of sweetness so that people ingest more sugar. That is not an accident that hidden sugars are often hidden with salt or with other flavors. It's done so that people will want to ingest more of a particular food, independent of how sweet that food tastes.

The savory foods are often laden with these hidden sugars that we can't register as sweetness, but they trigger the neuropod cells, which then further trigger dopamine, which make us want more of them. Now we may be able to resist eating more of them, but it makes us crave more food in general. We will talk about ways to regulate this pathway, to sort of intervene in this subconscious pathway. But for now I'm hoping that just the understanding that we all have this pathway — this is hardwired into our body — could potentially allow people to better understand why their cravings are so intense, and that it's not necessarily just about the taste of that food.

And when you consider this in concert with the fact that we have this dopamine pleasure-pain balance that I referred to earlier, you start to realize that there are multiple mechanisms hardwired into us that make it especially hard to not eat the sweet thing or to not eat the food that we're craving. We have two major accelerators — it's like a car with two accelerators — and we will talk about the brakes. Two ways that really get us into forward motion toward pursuing the consumption of sweet foods.

## [00:58:03] Glucose Metabolism in the Brain

That sweet things that we perceive as sweet make us want to eat more of those, because of dopamine, and then send us down this pain-pleasure pathway that I mentioned earlier. And the fact that we have this subconscious circuit coming from the neuropod cells in our gut that are registering the presence of sugar or glucose-increasing foods in our gut and sending those signals to the brain for yet more dopamine and pain-pleasure challenges — there's a third layer to this whole thing. And that has to do with how sugar is metabolized in the brain, or I should say how glucose is used.

Without getting into too much detail, some of the more beautiful studies of neuroimaging and evaluating which brain areas are active when we eat certain foods were done by Dr. Dana Small's lab at Yale University, and by other laboratories too. They used an approach called positron emission tomography, PET scanning, along with a tool called 2-Deoxy-D-glucose. 2-Deoxy-D-glucose is involved in the procedure of seeing which brain areas are active when people eat foods or engage in other types of behaviors. But the way that 2-Deoxy-D-glucose — sometimes shortened 2DG — works is to block glucose uptake from neurons. And instead, bring along with it a marker that one can see through imaging.

So in other words, a tool for looking at what parts of the brain are active when eating particular foods actually prevents foods such as sugar from allowing glucose to get into particular neurons. Now that might seem like a bad situation — you'd say, well, wait, you're trying to understand how sugar works in the brain, and then you block the ability for sugar, glucose, to bind to or be used by these neurons, because of the thing that you're using for the experiment. Exactly, it's a huge problem, but it turns out to be a huge problem that led to a great insight. And the great insight is this: the preference for sweet tasting foods and liquids is actually blocked by 2-Deoxy-D-glucose.

What that means, experimentally, but also in terms of what it means for you and me in the real world, is that there's yet a third parallel pathway that's related to the use of blood sugar, the use of glucose by neurons, that further reinforces our desire to eat more sweet things. And the preference for sweet foods can actually be eliminated through 2-Deoxy-D-glucose.

The point is that it is the sweet taste of sugary foods, it is the signals coming from your gut — from your digestive tract to your brain — and it's the use of the metabolic consequences of sugary foods that are acting as a three-pronged push on your desire to consume more sugary foods. So this car analogy that I used before, where it's some weird car that has two accelerators — it actually has three accelerators. And with three accelerators all pushing the system hard, we can say there must be something really special about this pathway. And indeed there is. This pathway is the quickest source of fuel for the brain and the rest of the nervous system.

I realize that all the ketonistas are probably saying, no, actually ketones are the preferred source. Okay, I acknowledge that there are conditions under which you can bring your blood glucose very low, and there are reasons to do that. Ketosis has been a terrifically successful treatment for a lot of forms of epilepsy, in particular pediatric epilepsy. Many people do derive benefit from ketogenic diets, so I'm not knocking ketogenic diets. But if you were to look at what neurons normally prefer, meaning in a typical diet regimen, it would be glucose. And the fact that fructose is eventually converted to glucose, the fact that when we ingest sucrose it's eventually converted into a fuel that neurons can use — what you basically arrive at is the fact that your nervous system is a glucose-consuming machine. And you've got at least three pathways that are pushing on your brain consciously and subconsciously to get you to seek and consume more sugar.

## [01:03:00] Tool: Glycemic Index, Blunting Sugar Cravings

And perhaps what we should do in order to regulate these pathways, such that we don't feel so controlled by them, but rather that we control their output. Once you understand that these circuits exist and you understand that there are simple substitutions and modifications that one can make to their food intake that can work within these pathways and even bypass some of these pathways, you start to realize that you have a lot more control over sugar intake and sugar appetite than you previously thought.

Now, many of you have heard of the so-called glycemic index. The glycemic index is a measure of how quickly blood sugar rises after ingesting particular foods. Very broadly speaking, we can say that there are low glycemic index foods, of less than 55, medium glycemic index foods, which go from about 55 to 69, and then so-called high glycemic foods, which are above 70. A couple of things to understand about how the glycemic index is measured.

Measurements of glycemic indices of food are typically made by having people ingest those foods in isolation. And in general, we can say that anytime we ingest fiber and/or fat — lipids — along with a particular food, it will reduce the glycemic index of that particular food, either the absolute level of blood glucose that a particular food causes or the rate at which that elevation in blood glucose occurs. And this is why there are some seemingly paradoxical aspects to sweet stuff in terms of the glycemic index. For instance, ice cream has a lower glycemic index, provided it's ice cream that includes fat, compared to something like mangoes or table sugar.

So the glycemic index is not something to hold holy in most cases, because most people are not ingesting foods in isolation. There's also the context in which you ingest particular foods. As I mentioned earlier, after I do hard training of any kind — training that ought to deplete glycogen — I actually make it a point to ingest some very sweet high glycemic foods like a mango. I'll also ingest some starches because I'm trying to replenish glycogen. But most of the time I'm avoiding these high glycemic foods and high sugar foods.

If we zoom out and take our perspective on all of this discussion about the glycemic index, through the lens of the nervous system — and we remind ourselves that neurons prefer glucose for energy and that all sweet things, or things that we perceive as sweet but also sweet things that are ingested and registered by those neuropod cells in our gut trigger the release of dopamine and trigger these neural circuits to make us want to eat more of these foods — what we start to realize is that a sharp rise in blood glucose or a very high degree of elevation in blood glucose is going to be a much more potent signal than would a more moderate rise in blood glucose or a slower rise in blood glucose.

So if we think about the analogy of three accelerators — three parallel neural circuits all essentially there to get us to seek out and consume more sweet tasting and sugary foods — well then the glycemic index is sort of our measurement of how hard we are pushing down, or how fast we are pushing down, on those three accelerators. And so for those of you that are trying to reduce sugar intake, and you want to do that through an understanding of how these neural circuits work, and you want to short circuit some of the dopamine release that's caused by ingesting sugary foods, it can be advantageous to ingest sweet foods either alone or in combination with foods that reduce glycemic index or reduce glycemic load.

So that might mean making different food choices — paying attention to sweet tasting foods that can satisfy sugar cravings, but do not have as steep a rise in blood sugar. Or it could mean consuming other foods along with sweet foods in order to reduce the glycemic index and thereby slow or blunt the release of dopamine. You might think, well, why would I want to do that? I want the maximum dopamine output in response to a given sweet food. But you really don't, because of the pleasure-pain balance that dopamine causes.

And in fact, if we consider some of the non-food substances that really push hard on these dopamine pathways, we can come up with a somewhat sinister but nonetheless appropriate analogy. The drug cocaine causes very robust, potent increases in dopamine within the brain, and typically causes people to want to ingest more cocaine because of those sharp increases in dopamine. But within the category of the drug cocaine, there are various modes of ingestion — some people inhale it, some people will inject it intravenously, some people will smoke it. And those different forms of taking cocaine actually impact the dopamine circuits differently. It turns out that crack cocaine, the smokable form, increases dopamine to a very high degree, but also very quickly. And it is the sharp rise in dopamine over time — not so much the absolute level of dopamine — that makes crack cocaine so absolutely addictive.

So sometimes you'll hear, you know, sugar is like crack. Well, even though I don't think the measurements have been done in the same experiment, I think it's reasonable to think that the absolute level of dopamine caused by ingesting sugar is not going to be as high as the absolute level of dopamine caused by smoking crack. But it is appropriate to say that the rate of dopamine increase over time has a profound effect on how people will go on to want to pursue more of what caused that increase in dopamine.

So what I'm basically saying is: if you're going to ingest sweet foods in order to satisfy a sweet craving, ingesting sweet foods for which the glycemic index is lower, or in which you've adjusted those glycemic index foods through the co-ingestion of fiber or maybe fat, might be beneficial. So if you really wanted to adjust your sugar cravings and you really still want to ingest some sugary foods, you probably would be better off combining fiber with that sugary or sweet food.

Now I do realize that it's somewhat unusual if you decided to consume broccoli along with your chocolate or with another dessert that would otherwise cause a steep increase in blood sugar. But nonetheless, if your goal is to blunt your sugar cravings, what you really need to do is blunt that dopamine increase. What we're really talking about here is trying to reduce the dopamine signal that is the consequence of ingesting sweet foods. And we're talking about doing that through these different parallel pathways — not just by preventing sweet taste, but also by preventing the post-ingestive effects of sweet foods. And of course the backdrop to all of this is that most of us should probably be ingesting fewer refined sugars.

## [01:12:08] Sugary Drinks, Highly Refined Sugars

But I think the bulk of data point to the fact that ingesting these highly palatable, highly processed foods, or foods that contain a lot of high fructose corn syrup, can be really deleterious to our health, especially in kids. The major culprit always seems to be sugary drinks, meaning soft drinks.

I do want to point out the incredible work of Dr. Robert Lustig, who's a pediatric endocrinologist at the University of California San Francisco. He was really early in the game of voicing the dangers of so-called hidden sugars and highly processed foods. His laboratory has done important work showing, for instance, that if high fructose corn syrup or even just fructose is replaced with glucose — even if the same number of calories is ingested — that there are important, meaning significant, reductions in type two diabetes, some of the metabolic syndromes associated with high fructose corn syrup, and on and on. I think that work from Lustig and others has really illustrated that we should all be trying to reduce our intake of highly refined sugars and high fructose corn syrup. And certainly trying to reduce our intake of very sugary drinks — not just soft drinks, but also fruit juices that contain a lot of sugar.

Now, even for people that are of healthy weight and who don't have metabolic syndromes, there may be an additional reason to not want to ingest very sweet foods and highly refined sugars. And this has to do with a new and emerging area of nutrition neuroscience. I want to point out that these are new data, so it's not a lock, the double-blind placebo-controlled studies in large populations have not been finished. But I also want to make clear what some of the really exciting data coming from Dana Small's lab at Yale, and from other laboratories, are showing. And this has to do with what's called conditioned taste preference.

## [01:14:33] Artificial Sweeteners

Using a kind of Pavlovian paradigm, what they do is they have people — and these studies were done in people — ingest maltodextrin, which increases blood glucose, doesn't have much flavor, but even if it does have a little bit of subtle flavor, the maltodextrin is cloaked by some other flavor. And by cloaking it with that other flavor or pairing it with that other flavor, what they find is that over time, because the maltodextrin increases blood glucose, and they're ingesting a particular flavor along with that maltodextrin, they can then remove the maltodextrin, and the flavor will induce an increase in insulin. The increase in insulin of course is the consequence of the fact that anytime there's a rise in blood glucose, provided the person isn't diabetic, there's a parallel increase in insulin.

Now this is very interesting because what it says, at a first pass, is that we are very Pavlovian in terms of our physiological responses to foods, and particular flavors come to be associated with particular patterns of blood glucose increase and hence patterns of insulin increase. This also has implications for understanding things like artificial sweeteners. And here I want to highlight that this is still very controversial work, needs more data, but nonetheless, I'd like to share it with you for consideration.

The Small laboratory has done studies in humans, both in adults and in children, showing that if the flavor of artificial sweeteners is paired with maltodextrin, and then the maltodextrin is removed, that the artificial sweetener taste itself can subsequently increase insulin in the bloodstream. In other words, taking something that increases blood sugar, attaching a flavor experience to that, having children or adults ingest that thing, allows the nervous system to associate that flavor with that increase in blood glucose. But then you can remove the glucose-increasing substance, and the flavor alone will increase insulin, because insulin typically follows blood glucose. So this is a conditioning effect.

Now, the reason these data are controversial is several-fold. First of all, the landscape around the discussion around artificial sweeteners is definitely what I would call a barbed wire topic. And I want to preface what I'm about to say next by saying, I actually ingest artificial sweeteners. I will have the occasional diet soda — not every day, maybe once or twice a month. I don't particularly like the taste, but I'll do it just because it's around, and I want some caffeine and I like the carbonation if I'm on a plane or something. I do ingest plant-based non-caloric sweeteners. To my knowledge, there have not been high quality studies of plant-based non-caloric sweeteners in the context that I'm referring to here.

Nonetheless, these studies show that particular flavors can be conditioned to cause an insulin increase. And the flavor associated with certain artificial sweeteners is included in that category of flavors that can induce insulin, even in the absence of something that can increase blood glucose. One interpretation that Dana Small has offered to her data is that if people are going to ingest artificial sweeteners, and they do that along with foods that very sharply increase blood glucose, then there is the potential — I highlight the potential — for those same artificial sweeteners to increase insulin even in the absence of food.

Let's draw the scenario out in the real world. You're having a diet soda along with a cheeseburger and fries. You do that every day for lunch. And then you just have a diet soda alone. The extreme interpretation of the data they've collected says, well, that diet soda alone will increase insulin, even though there's no increase in blood glucose, because you conditioned that taste of artificial sweetener to the experience of a rise in glucose and hence insulin. The counter argument would be: that's a very unusual situation; maltodextrin causes big increases in blood glucose, so that's not really a fair experiment or it's not a natural world experiment. And I think that's a decent assessment.

Although I will point out that one of the reasons why these data are so controversial is that the experiment actually had to be stopped. Particularly the experiment in children had to be stopped because the changes in insulin that were observed early in the study were so detrimental that the institutional review board, quite appropriately, said we can't do this to these kids. They're experiencing these odd shifts in insulin that are not healthy for them when they're just ingesting artificial sweeteners in the absence of these glucose-increasing foods.

So once again, I do ingest artificial sweeteners. I'm not saying that they are dangerous, I'm not saying that they are not dangerous, I'm saying that you have to decide for yourself. In previous episodes, I've highlighted that artificial sweeteners have been shown in studies of animals — sucralose in particular — when given in very high doses, there can be fairly robust disruption to the gut microbiome, which is vital for immune health and brain health, et cetera. But thus far, our knowledge of how artificial sweeteners negatively or positively impact the microbiome and other deleterious effects on the body has mainly been explored in animal studies.

I bring it up today to illustrate the following point. Normally we have a pathway that we don't have to condition at all — it's there from birth — whereby ingestion of sweet foods causes increases in dopamine. And there are parallel pathways by which neurons in our gut and elsewhere in our body trigger further increases in dopamine. There's no need for a conditioned response. You're hardwired to want to eat sweet things by at least two and probably three parallel pathways. The work from Dana Small's lab and others has beautifully shown that any flavor that's associated with a glucose spike or a long sustained increase in glucose can also be conditioned. The circuits for dopamine that reinforce the desire to eat particular things is not unique to the sugar pathway.

And this is one of the reasons I believe why ingestion of sweet foods doesn't just lead us to want to eat more sweet foods. In addition, ingesting sweet foods and/or foods that raise blood glucose but that we don't perceive as sweet — so for instance, foods with hidden sugars, sugars that have been masked by salty or spicy taste — increases our desire for glucose-elevating foods and food generally. For people that struggle with regulating their appetite or with regulating their sugar appetite, I think the understanding of conditioned flavor preference, while a little bit complicated, ought to be useful in trying to navigate reducing sugar cravings and sugar intake.

## [01:22:36] ADHD, Omega-3s

As a segue into tools to control sugar intake, as a means to both regulate sugar intake itself, as well as food intake overall and steer us towards healthier choices — I'd like to talk about some of the special populations out there that might want to be especially wary of having a dysregulated sugar appetite system. And the group I'm referring to specifically are those with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, or people who have issues with focus and attention generally. And I think more and more nowadays, I'm hearing that people are having a hard time focusing. This probably has something to do with our interactions with electronic devices.

As I always say, if a picture is worth a thousand words, a movie is worth a million pictures. And the fact that we can access so many movies just by scrolling with our thumb is something that the nervous system has just never contended with before in human history. Attention and ability to focus is obviously key to success in school, success in relationships, success in the workplace, and success in life.

If you look at the sum total of the meta-analysis and the clinical data on ADHD and nutrition, you arrive at a pretty clear answer, which is that sugar consumption, in particular highly refined sugars, is just not good for people with ADHD or with attentional issues. Now, as I say that, I also want you to recall the earlier study that I referred to, whereby the tuning of neurons in the brain is highly dependent on glucose. So this doesn't mean consuming no glucose is going to be a good idea.

I'm basing this mainly on the conclusions of a really nice paper: "Sugar Consumption, Sugar Sweetened Beverages, and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis." This was published in Complementary Therapies in Medicine. The sum total of this meta-analysis is really that when especially kids get beyond four sugary drinks per week — so four sodas of a typical 12 ounce soda — that's when you start to see a shift towards more negative outcomes, more symptoms of existing ADHD. Now where the controversy comes in is whether or not sugar consumption can actually trigger or cause ADHD. And I don't think we can conclude that at all at this time.

What's also interesting in terms of ADHD and sugar intake — and it probably has relevance to all of us — is that they also cover some of the interesting data showing that supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids can actually be beneficial for people, in particular kids with ADHD. I've talked before about the utility of omega-3s. That's been shown in various studies that have compared omega-3 fatty acid intake to prescription antidepressants like SSRIs — Prozac, Zoloft, Fluoxetine — and the results of those studies are pretty clear to me: that provided one gets at least one gram of EPA, essential fatty acids, per day — one or more grams per day of the EPA form of essential fatty acid — can rival some prescription antidepressants and/or decrease the amount of antidepressants required. Of course, talk to your psychiatrist, talk to your doctor, but the omega-3s are no doubt powerful.

Why am I talking about this in the context of an episode on sugar and the nervous system? Well, if you remember those neuropod cells — those cells in your gut that respond to sugar and send signals up to the brain to cause the release of dopamine — it turns out that neuropod cells also respond to amino acids and to fatty acids, in particular essential fatty acids. So these cells that we call neuropod cells have three jobs: one is to detect levels of sugar in the gut, the other is to detect levels of amino acids, and to detect levels of particular essential fatty acids, and communicate that information to the brain. All three — sugar, essential fatty acids, or amino acids — will trigger these neurons to signal to the brain to increase dopamine.

And it is not coincidental that omega-3 fatty acid supplementation can help ameliorate some of the symptoms of ADHD by way of presumably increasing dopamine in this neuropod-to-dopamine pathway that we talked about earlier. The whole thing has a very nice logical structure to it. And points to yet again the immense value of bringing the proper amounts — maybe even supplementing the proper amounts — of omega-3 fatty acids and the proper amounts of amino acids into the gut as a way to supplant some of the stimulation of these pathways that would otherwise be caused by sugar.

There's actually a version of this where one could say, if you want to reduce sugar cravings, you might consider increasing certain forms of amino acid intake or certain forms of fatty acid intake.

## [01:30:18] Tools: Reduce Sugar Cravings with EPA Omega-3s & Glutamine

So what are some ways that we can reduce our sugar cravings, and ideally ways that also benefit us in other ways, both nutritionally and from the neuroscience standpoint? Well, these neuropod cells that respond to and signal the brain when we ingest sugar also respond to amino acids and essential fatty acids. I make it a particular point to ingest anywhere from one to three grams of EPA essential fatty acid per day. I make it a point to do that with the ingestion of high quality omega-3s.

For me, the simplest way to do that, and I think for most people the lowest cost way, is to use some liquid form of fish oil or some capsule form of fish oil. You really do have to see how much essential fatty acid in the form of EPA is in those. You can also do this through foods, through things like algae, and there are plant-based sources of EPAs; you can do this with high quality fish oil. In any case, that does seem, at least based on a modest amount but nonetheless solid literature, to reduce sugar cravings somewhat.

So we don't know yet based on human studies whether or not the ingestion of those EPAs is specifically activating the neuropod cells, which specifically activates dopamine release and bypasses the need for or the craving for sugar. We don't know that yet. But logically, it holds up to assume that. The fact that these neuropod cells — and I should say other neurons within the gut — respond very robustly to the presence of particular amino acids is also a potential lever by which one could reduce sugar cravings.

And there's an interesting literature around the amino acid glutamine, in particular supplementing with the amino acid glutamine as it relates to sugar cravings, and certainly as it relates to other aspects of the gut, in particular leaky gut. The use of supplemental glutamine to try and treat leaky gut is not a new phenomenon. But there are many people who are experimenting with supplementing with glutamine — several grams per day, often five grams distributed through three or four different servings throughout the day — as a way to blunt their sugar cravings. Now there has not yet been a large scale clinical trial using glutamine to reduce sugar cravings, but the results of the few studies that I looked at, as well as my understanding of the logic of these neuro circuits, brings us to a conclusion that it makes sense why if there's a population of neurons within our gut that responds very robustly to the presence of sugar, fatty acids, or amino acids, that the intake of particular amino acids would allow the dopamine pathways that might otherwise be triggered by sugar to be triggered by something like glutamine, which has very few or no calories.

Many people that I know went out and tried this — now this is anec-data, right? This is not a quality peer reviewed study. Many of them have reported back that they actually feel as if their sugar cravings are reduced. I know some people who actually take glutamine and mix it with full fat cream and take it kind of like a shot of full fat cream. If you do try this approach of ingesting glutamine to reduce sugar cravings, you want to increase the amount of glutamine that you take somewhat gradually. It can create some gastric distress if you just take a big tablespoon of it and throw it in water three times a day.

Please also realize that there's an entire literature devoted to the potential hazards of increasing glutamine if you have a preexisting cancer. So if you have cancer or you're cancer-prone, I would really discourage you from this approach. And in any case, as always, talk to your doctor. The logic nonetheless is there for why increasing amino acid intake or fatty acid intake might decrease sugar craving.

## [01:35:15] Tool: Blunt Sugar Peaks & Craving with Lemon Juice

Now there are other ways to reduce sugar craving and there are certainly ways to reduce the sharp rise in blood glucose that can occur when we ingest sugary sweet foods or even just an abundance of carbohydrate foods. I'm going to sort of layer up through the ones that you might find in your cupboard, at the grocery store, and then get into some of the more esoteric ones, many of which however can be quite potent. The first of which is simple lemon juice, or lime juice.

There was an old lore and actually some papers, pointing to the idea that the ingestion of vinegar — either white vinegar or wine vinegar — could somehow blunt blood glucose after the ingestion of sugary foods or the ingestion of a lot of carbohydrate foods, or even just a big meal. Actually, Tim Ferriss — I should say the great Tim Ferriss, because I do have great respect for the fact that he seems to be about 10 years ahead of everything, both in terms of nutrition and skill learning — many of the things that he predicted in his books, "The 4-Hour Body" and "The 4-Hour Chef," actually turned out to be true based on scientific data. He talked about the fact that, at least in his experiments on himself, the ingestion of vinegar did not seem to blunt blood glucose, and he was using continuous glucose monitors.

He talked about the use of blood glucose monitors. Those, I think at the time, were implanted below the skin. Nowadays there are less invasive blood glucose monitors, things like Levels and so forth, and these are actually becoming pretty popular. I've worn one of these before. They're actually pretty informative. I learned, for instance, that when I go in the sauna, I experience a sharp rise in blood glucose — and that makes sense because of the dehydration associated with being in the sauna, a lot of sweating, the concentration of sugar in the bloodstream goes up.

Regardless, there are now data pointing to the fact that lemon juice and lime juice — a couple tablespoons or so — if ingested before, or even during, or even after, consumption of sugary foods, or foods that sharply increase blood glucose or large carbohydrate meals, can actually blunt the blood glucose response. And I did see that when I did my own experiments on myself with a continuous glucose monitor. I saw some big increases in blood glucose in certain instances, and then I would ingest some lemon juice or lime juice, typically mixed in with water. And sure enough, you could see a blunting of the blood glucose response.

So for those of you that are interested in blunting your blood sugar response to certain foods, that's a simple, low cost way to do that, if you want to explore it. I will say, if you are fasting and you already have low blood glucose, and you ingest some lemon juice or lime juice in water, be careful because you can actually become hypoglycemic. For the very same reasons that lemon juice and lime juice can blunt blood glucose when your blood glucose levels are moderate to high, you can also reduce blood glucose levels even further when blood glucose levels are low.

But we can't say that has to do with acidic things generally. Many of you have probably seen in the store so-called adjusted pH waters or foods and drinks that are supposed to adjust your pH. Hate to break it to you, but your pH is very tightly regulated throughout your brain and body. You do not want this to change. It is entirely impossible, at least in any safe way, that you would become more alkaline by ingesting an alkaline water. It is true that the pH — your alkalinity and acidity — varies in different compartments in your body, and that's important. Unless you are hemorrhaging or vomiting or there's something badly wrong with you, you don't want big shifts in your body pH. So I encourage you not to hop on the bandwagon of adjusting pH.

When you ingest lemon juice or lime juice, the mechanism by which it blunts blood glucose is probably twofold. One is probably through the post-ingestive effects of glucose in the gut — the way in which sugars are interacting with neurons and other components of your gut circuitry to impact things like gastric emptying time, to impact things like the firing of those neuropod cells and their signaling to the brain. But almost certainly it also has something to do with the perception of sour taste on the tongue.

You don't just have sweet taste receptors in your mouth — you also have bitter taste receptors, salty taste receptors, sour taste receptors in your mouth and on your tongue and palate. And those are interacting. If you ingest a substance that's just sweet or mostly sweet, that causes a certain set of effects on your blood glucose, but also your brain, dopamine, and the other neural circuits. If you also ingest something that's sour like lemon juice or lime juice, it adjusts the output of those neural circuits in your brain.

And in fact, we know based on the beautiful work of Charles Zuker at Columbia Medical School, that that's exactly what happens. They've measured the activity of neurons at various locations in the so-called taste pathways of the brain. And they found that when particular tastes like just sweet or just bitter or just sour evoke certain ensembles of neurons to fire in particular sequences, when sweet and sour are co-ingested, when bitter and sour are co-ingested, you get distinct ensembles — meaning distinct patterns of activity of those neurons — and of course, distinct patterns of downstream activity within the brain and body.

So while it is still somewhat mysterious as to how exactly things like lemon juice and lime juice can reduce our blood glucose spikes when we ingest those with sweet foods or carbohydrate-laden foods, you can use this as a tool with the understanding that there's a grounding in the biology of the way these circuits work.

## [01:43:09] Tool: Reduce Sugar Cravings & Spikes with Cinnamon

Now, some of you have probably heard that cinnamon can be a useful tool for controlling blood sugar. And indeed that's the case. It's very clear that cinnamon can adjust the rate of glucose entry into the stream, possibly by changing the rate of gastric emptying — it might slow the rate of gastric emptying and thereby also reduce the glycemic index of particular foods.

There's some debate out there as to whether or not Cassia cinnamon or Ceylon cinnamon is best for purposes of blunting blood glucose spikes. But by my read of the data, it doesn't really matter provided it's real cinnamon. And you have to actually look and make sure that it's real cinnamon, because a lot of cinnamon that you buy is not real.

I do want to provide a cautionary note about cinnamon, however. Cinnamon contains something called coumarin, which can be toxic at high levels. So you don't want to ingest more than about a teaspoon, maybe a teaspoon and a half of cinnamon per day, because you'll start to exceed the threshold at which cinnamon could start to be problematic. But certainly if you're going to have a big meal or a meal that has a lot of sugar in it or a lot of carbohydrate-laden foods, and you don't want an increase in blood glucose, you could put cinnamon in a beverage, you could put cinnamon on food, in order to blunt that blood glucose increase and reduce the glycemic index by way of reducing gastric emptying time. Again, just making sure that you don't get past that one and a half teaspoons per day.

So we've talked about lemon juice and lime juice and cinnamon — these are kind of commonplace in many kitchens. Then of course we can venture into the more esoteric or I would say the more advanced tools for adjusting sugar intake.

## [01:45:10] Berberine, Sustained Low Blood Glucose Levels

And the one that comes to mind is of course Berberine. Berberine is a derivative of tree bark and it is a very, very potent substance for reducing blood glucose. So much so that it is on par with Metformin or Glibenclamide, which are prescription drugs specifically used to reduce blood glucose. So using Berberine is a serious step; you should absolutely talk to your doctor about it.

I know of a number of people that use it to lower blood glucose when they eat really large meals. I know a number of people that are using it to get to some of the other effects of Metformin that people have discussed, things like activating or tapping into the so-called AMPK pathway, reducing mTOR — these are people that are aiming their activities at increasing longevity. It is true that if you ingest Berberine, your blood glucose will plummet. And I point that out because I've actually tried it before; it gave me brutal headaches and I felt really dizzy, and I felt like I couldn't see straight. It made me hypoglycemic — it actually drove my blood glucose down too far. And the reason it did that is that I took Berberine on an empty stomach.

I would say, be very cautious about ingesting Berberine on an empty stomach, or if you are on a low carbohydrate diet, unless you really know what you're doing and you have a medical professional to guide you through that. If I took Berberine along with a very large meal that included a lot of carbohydrates, I felt perfectly fine on even up to 750 milligrams or a gram of Berberine. It has the kind of unique property of making you feel not overwhelmed by the amount of blood glucose increase that you're experiencing from eating a big meal.

It does have some other interesting effects in terms of lowering total cholesterol that are research-supported, and of reducing insulin a little bit. Well, that's not surprising — if you reduce blood glucose, you're going to reduce insulin because of course insulin manages blood glucose in the bloodstream. So I would place Berberine and of course Metformin and Glibenclamide in the heavy-hitting, potent tools for regulating blood glucose.

What's interesting about Berberine, Metformin, Glibenclamide and related substances is that some of the effects are of course on gastric emptying or buffering blood glucose within the bloodstream. But there appear to also be some neural effects of having chronically low glucose or blunting blood glucose through things like Berberine. And some of those neural effects include long-standing changes in the hormonal cascades that are the consequence of having low blood sugar and thereby changes in the neural circuits that manage blood glucose overall.

The simple way of saying this is that by maintaining low to moderate blood glucose — either by not ingesting heavily carbohydrate-laden foods or by blunting blood glucose through things like Metformin or Berberine, even if ingesting carbohydrates and maybe even some sugars — over time, it seems that there's an adjustment, what we call a homeostatic regulation of the neural circuits that control things like sugar craving. And indeed, some people report feeling fewer sugar cravings over time.

If you're going to explore Berberine or Metformin or otherwise, in addition to working with a doctor, I think you should understand why you're doing it. The typical dose range for Berberine is anywhere from half a gram to 1.5 grams daily. And there are some other substances like sodium caprate that are known to augment the effects of Berberine via the AMPK pathways — they can increase the ability for Berberine to have its glucose-lowering actions. But that of course is getting into the really potent, what I would call sharp-blade tools for controlling blood glucose. And listen, anytime you're dealing with blood glucose, you are dealing with the brain's preferred source of fuel. And anytime you're dealing with the brain's preferred source of fuel, you have to be especially cautious about depriving the brain of what it needs.

## [01:51:24] Tool: Sleep & Sugar Cravings

And this tool is what I would call a high performance tool, but it's one that you probably didn't suspect, and that's sleep. I've done extensive episodes about sleep, and we actually have an episode called "Master Your Sleep." What is the role of sleep in sugar metabolism, sugar hunger, and the way that the brain regulates those things?

Well, there's a really exciting study that came out just last year. This study was published in the journal Cell Reports, a Cell Press journal, and it involved having people sleep in the laboratory. But what they did was they actually measured from the breath of these people, and they extracted from their breath the metabolites that would allow them to understand what sorts of metabolism was occurring in these people's bodies at different phases of sleep. And this is a really remarkable study. They actually did this every 10 seconds throughout the entire night, so at very high resolution, they could evaluate what is the metabolism in the brain and body that people experience as they go from REM sleep to slow wave sleep and so on.

What they discovered was that each stage of sleep was associated with a very particular signature pattern of metabolism, and particular phases of sleep are associated with sugar metabolism, or more with fat metabolism, or more with other aspects of metabolism. And the reason why I think this study is important to discuss in the context of today's discussion about sugar in the brain, is that many people have experienced the effects of disrupted sleep on their appetite. And in particular, it's been reported that when people are sleep deprived or the quality of their sleep is disrupted, their appetite for sugary food increases.

Now that was always assumed to be due to some metabolic need that was triggered by the sleep deprivation or by the poor sleep. But in reading over this study, some of the more important points made by the authors relate to the fact that sleep is known to have incredibly important effects on brain and body for a variety of systems — immune system, neural functioning, et cetera. This very organized sequence of particular forms of metabolism being active during particular phases of sleep — which are very well orchestrated, slow wave sleep and REM sleep being orchestrated in 90-minute so-called ultradian cycles — is thought to perhaps set up the brain and body to be able to regulate itself in the waking hours. And therefore, when people are sleep deprived or deprived of certain forms or states within sleep, such as rapid eye movement sleep, that it creates a disruption in a particular set of metabolic pathways.

If you look at the sum total of the data on obesity or on type two diabetes or on metabolic syndromes of any kind, you almost always see disruptions in sleep. Now, some of those could be due to sleep apnea caused by even just the size of somebody's neck or the weight of their body. In other words, we don't know the direction of the effect — metabolic syndromes could disrupt sleep, which disrupt metabolic syndromes. And indeed the authors point out quite appropriately that they don't understand the direction of the effects that they observe either. But there is now a plethora of data pointing to the fact that getting quality sleep each night helps regulate not only appetite, but also the specific forms of metabolism that drive specific appetites.

So the takeaway is: while there are extravagant and potent and interesting ways to regulate blood glucose — everything from cinnamon to lemon juice, to Berberine, to sodium caprate, to behavioral tools, to the mere understanding of how the direct and indirect pathways go from the gut to dopamine — if you're not establishing the firm foundation of proper metabolism, all of those things are going to be sort of rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic. So we can't overstate the importance of getting regular, sufficient amount of high quality sleep, at least 80% of the time — not for sake of immune system function or for clear thinking, but also for properly regulating our metabolism, including our sugar metabolism.

Thank you for joining me for this discussion about sugar and the nervous system and how they are regulating each other in both the brain and body.

## [01:56:33] Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Instagram, Twitter, Thorne, Neural Network Newsletter

If you're enjoying and/or learning from this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. Please also subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have comments and feedback or suggestions for future topics and guests, please leave those in the comments section on YouTube.

In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast — that's the best way to support us. In addition, we have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on social media, we are on Instagram and Twitter at Huberman Lab. At both of those places, we discuss science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, and some of which is distinct from the podcast. So again, Instagram and Twitter, at Huberman Lab.

We also have a Neural Network Newsletter. This is a zero cost monthly newsletter that contains podcast summaries as well as protocols in the form of brief PDFs that cover everything from neuroplasticity to learning and memory to sleep, to deliberate cold exposure to deliberate heat exposure, and much more. You can sign up for the Neural Network Newsletter at hubermanlab.com. Just go to the menu, click on newsletter, put in your email, and we will not share that with anybody. Thank you again for joining me for today's discussion about sugar and the nervous system.
