---
title: "Essentials: The Biology of Taste Perception & Sugar Craving | Dr. Charles Zuker"
type: transcript
episode_date: "2026-03-05"
episode_number: 375
speakers: [Andrew Huberman, Charles Zuker]
youtube_id: "cru_4P6qVYQ"
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:20] Senses \u0026 Perception

Charles, thank you so much for joining me today. My pleasure. I want to ask you about many things related to taste and gustatory perception. But maybe to start off and because you've worked on a number of different topics in neuroscience, not just taste, how should the world and people think about perception? How it's different from sensation?

And what leads to our experience of life in terms of vision, hearing, taste, etc. The world is made of real things. You know, this here is a glass and this is a chord and this is a microphone. But the brain is only made of neurons that only understand electrical signals. So how do you transform that reality into nothing but electrical signals that now need to represent the world and that process is we can is what we can operationally define as perception in the senses let's say alactory other taste vision you know we can very straightforwardly separate detection from perception.

Detection is what happens when you take a sugar molecule, you put it in your tongue, and then a set of specific cells now sense that sugar molecule. That's detection. You haven't perceived anything yet. That is just your cells in your tongue interacting with this chemical. But now that cell gets activated and sends a signal to the brain and now detection gets transformed into perception.

And he's trying to understand how that happens. That's been the the maniacal drive of my entire career in neuroscience. How does the brain ultimately transform detection into perception so that it can guide actions and behaviors? So if I want to begin to explore all of these Charles, thank you so much for joining me today. My pleasure.

I want to ask you about many things related to taste and gustatory perception. But maybe to start off and because you've worked on a number of different topics in neuroscience, not just taste, how should the world and people think about perception? How it's different from sensation? And what leads to our experience of life in terms of vision, hearing, taste, etc. The world is made of real things.

You know, this here is a glass and this is a chord and this is a microphone. But the brain is only made of neurons that only understand electrical signals. So how do you transform that reality into nothing but electrical signals that now need to represent the world and that process is we can is what we can operationally define as perception in the senses let's say alactory other taste vision you know we can very straightforwardly separate detection from perception. Detection is what happens when you take a sugar molecule, you put it in your tongue, and then a set of specific cells now sense that sugar molecule. That's detection.

You haven't perceived anything yet. That is just your cells in your tongue interacting with this chemical. But now that cell gets activated and sends a signal to the brain and now detection gets transformed into perception. And he's trying to understand how that happens. That's been the the maniacal drive of my entire career in neuroscience.

How does the brain ultimately transform detection into perception so that it can guide actions and behaviors? So if I want to begin to explore all of these

## [00:02:29] Taste, 5 Taste Qualities \u0026 Dietary Needs

things that the brain does, I felt I have to choose a sensory system that affords some degree of simplicity in the way that the input output relationships are put together. and in a way that still can be used to ask every one of these problems that the brain has to ultimately compute, encode, and decode. And what was remarkable about the taste system at the time that I began working on this is that nothing was known about the molecular basis of taste. You know, we knew that we could taste what has been usually defined as the b the five basic taste qualities. Sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami.

Umami is a Japanese word that means yummy, delicious. And that's in nearly every animal species the taste of amino acids. and in humans is mostly associated with the taste of MSG monos sodium glutamate one amino acid in particular and so the beautiful thing of the system is that the lines of input are limited to five and each of them has a predetermined meaning you're born with that specific veilance value for each taste of sweet umami and low salt are attractive taste qualities. They evoke appetitive responses. I want to consume them.

And bitter and sour are innately predetermined to be aversive. In the case of bitter, it's very easy to actually look at see them happening in animals because the first thing you do is you stop leaking. Then you put a unhappy face. Then you squint your eyes and then you start gagging. And that entire thing happens by the activation of a bitter molecule in a bitter sensing cell in your tongue.

It's incredible. It's it's it's again the magic of the brain. You know how how it it's able to encode and decode these extraordinary actions and behaviors in response of nothing but a simple very you know unique sensory stimuli. This palette of five basic tastes accommodates all the dietary needs of the organism. Sweet to ensure that we get the right amount of energy.

Umami to ensure that we get proteins, another essential nutrient. Salt, the three appetitive ones to ensure that we maintain our electrolyte balance. Bitter to prevent the ingestion of toxic nauseous chemicals. Nearly all bitter tasting, you know, things out in the wild are bad for you. And sour most likely to prevent ingestion of spoiled acid, fermented foods.

And that's it. That is the pallet that we deal with. Now, of things that the brain does, I felt I have to choose a sensory system that affords some degree of simplicity in the way that the input output relationships are put together. and in a way that still can be used to ask every one of these problems that the brain has to ultimately compute, encode, and decode. And what was remarkable about the taste system at the time that I began working on this is that nothing was known about the molecular basis of taste.

You know, we knew that we could taste what has been usually defined as the b the five basic taste qualities. Sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami. Umami is a Japanese word that means yummy, delicious. And that's in nearly every animal species the taste of amino acids. and in humans is mostly associated with the taste of MSG monos sodium glutamate one amino acid in particular and so the beautiful thing of the system is that the lines of input are limited to five and each of them has a predetermined meaning you're born with that specific veilance value for each taste of sweet umami and low salt are attractive taste qualities.

They evoke appetitive responses. I want to consume them. And bitter and sour are innately predetermined to be aversive. In the case of bitter, it's very easy to actually look at see them happening in animals because the first thing you do is you stop leaking. Then you put a unhappy face.

Then you squint your eyes and then you start gagging. And that entire thing happens by the activation of a bitter molecule in a bitter sensing cell in your tongue. It's incredible. It's it's it's again the magic of the brain. You know how how it it's able to encode and decode these extraordinary actions and behaviors in response of nothing but a simple very you know unique sensory stimuli.

This palette of five basic tastes accommodates all the dietary needs of the organism. Sweet to ensure that we get the right amount of energy. Umami to ensure that we get proteins, another essential nutrient. Salt, the three appetitive ones to ensure that we maintain our electrolyte balance. Bitter to prevent the ingestion of toxic nauseous chemicals.

Nearly all bitter tasting, you know, things out in the wild are bad for you. And sour most likely to prevent ingestion of spoiled acid, fermented foods. And that's it. That is the pallet that we deal with. Now, of

## [00:05:49] Taste vs Flavor

course, there's a difference between basic taste and flavor. Flavor is the whole experience. Flavor is the combination of multiple tastes coming together together with smell, with texture, with temperature, with the look of it that gives you what you and I would call the full sensory experience. But but we scientists need to reduce the the problem into its basic elements so we can begin to break it apart before we put it back together. So when we think about the sense of taste and we try to figure out how these lines of information go from your tongue to your brain and how they signal and how they get integrated and how they trigger all these different behaviors, we look at them as individual qualities.

So we give the animals sweet or we give them a bitter, we give them sour. We avoid mixes. Think of it as lines of information. Just separate lines like the keys of a piano. Yeah.

sweet sour beam. You play the key and you activate that one chord and that one chord in the case of a piano leads to a note you know a tune and in the case of taste lead to an action and a behavior. If you would describe the sequence of course, there's a difference between basic taste and flavor. Flavor is the whole experience. Flavor is the combination of multiple tastes coming together together with smell, with texture, with temperature, with the look of it that gives you what you and I would call the full sensory experience.

But but we scientists need to reduce the the problem into its basic elements so we can begin to break it apart before we put it back together. So when we think about the sense of taste and we try to figure out how these lines of information go from your tongue to your brain and how they signal and how they get integrated and how they trigger all these different behaviors, we look at them as individual qualities. So we give the animals sweet or we give them a bitter, we give them sour. We avoid mixes. Think of it as lines of information.

Just separate lines like the keys of a piano. Yeah. sweet sour beam. You play the key and you activate that one chord and that one chord in the case of a piano leads to a note you know a tune and in the case of taste lead to an action and a behavior. If you would describe the sequence of

## [00:07:05] Taste Buds; Bitter

neural events leading to a perceptual event of taste. We have taste bats distributed in various parts of the tongue. So there is a map on the distribution of taste buds but each taste bud has around a 100 taste receptor cells and those taste receptor cells can be of five types. Yeah. Sweet, sour, bitter, salty or umami.

And for the most part all taste buds have the representation of all five taste qualities. Now there's no question that there is a slight bias for some taste like bitter is particularly enriched at the very back of your tongue and there is a teological basis for that actually a biological basis for that. That's the last line of defense before you swallow something bad. And so let's make sure that the very back of your tongue has plenty of these bad news receptors so that if they get activated you can trigger a gagging reflex and get rid of this that otherwise may kill you. The important thing is that you know after the receptors for these five the the detectors the molecules that sense sweet sour be to mommy.

These are receptors, proteins found on the surface of taste receptor cells that interact with these chemicals. And once they interact, then they trigger the cascade of events, biochemical events inside the cell that now sends an electrical signal that says there is sweet here or there is salt here. Let's compare and contrast sweet neural events leading to a perceptual event of taste. We have taste bats distributed in various parts of the tongue. So there is a map on the distribution of taste buds but each taste bud has around a 100 taste receptor cells and those taste receptor cells can be of five types.

Yeah. Sweet, sour, bitter, salty or umami. And for the most part all taste buds have the representation of all five taste qualities. Now there's no question that there is a slight bias for some taste like bitter is particularly enriched at the very back of your tongue and there is a teological basis for that actually a biological basis for that. That's the last line of defense before you swallow something bad.

And so let's make sure that the very back of your tongue has plenty of these bad news receptors so that if they get activated you can trigger a gagging reflex and get rid of this that otherwise may kill you. The important thing is that you know after the receptors for these five the the detectors the molecules that sense sweet sour be to mommy. These are receptors, proteins found on the surface of taste receptor cells that interact with these chemicals. And once they interact, then they trigger the cascade of events, biochemical events inside the cell that now sends an electrical signal that says there is sweet here or there is salt here. Let's compare and contrast sweet

## [00:08:54] Sweet vs Bitter, Sensory Perception from Tongue to Brain

and bitter as we follow their lines from the tongue to the brain. So the first thing is that the two evoke diametrically opposed behaviors. If we have to come up with two sensory experience that represent polar opposites, it will be sweet and bitter. So then the signals, if we follow now these two lines, they're really like two separate keys at the two ends of this keyboard. And you press one key and you activate this chord.

So you activate the sweet cells throughout your oral cavity and they all converge into a group of sweet neurons. In the next station which is still outside the brain is one of the taste ganglia. These are the neurons that intervate your tongue and the oral cavity. Where do they sit approximately? Are there around there?

Yeah, right here around the the lymph nodes more or less. You got it. And there are two main ganglia that innervate the vast majority of all taste buds in the oral cavity. And then from there that sweet signal goes onto the brain stem. The brain stem is the entry of the body into the brain.

And there are different areas of the brain stem and there are different groups of neurons in the brain stem. And there's a unique area in a unique topographically defined location in the rostral side of the brain stem that receives all of the taste input. A very dense area of the brain. A very rich area of the brain. Exactly.

And from there, this sweet signal goes to this other area higher up on the brain stem. And then it goes through a number of stations where that sweet signal goes from sweet neuron to sweet neuron to sweet neuron to eventually get to your cortex. And once it gets to your taste cortex, that's where meaning is imposed into that signal. It's then this is what the data suggests that now you can identify this as a sweet stimuli and how quickly does that all happen? You know the time scale of the nervous system it's fast.

Yeah. And within less than a second. Yeah. And and in fact we can demonstrate this because we can stick electrodes at each of these stations. You deliver the stimuli and within a fraction of a second you see now the response in this following stations.

Now it gets to the cortex and now in there you impose meaning to that taste. There's an area of your brain that represents the taste of sweet in taste cortex and a different area that represents the taste of bitter. In essence, there is a topographic map of these taste qualities inside your brain. and bitter as we follow their lines from the tongue to the brain. So the first thing is that the two evoke diametrically opposed behaviors.

If we have to come up with two sensory experience that represent polar opposites, it will be sweet and bitter. So then the signals, if we follow now these two lines, they're really like two separate keys at the two ends of this keyboard. And you press one key and you activate this chord. So you activate the sweet cells throughout your oral cavity and they all converge into a group of sweet neurons. In the next station which is still outside the brain is one of the taste ganglia.

These are the neurons that intervate your tongue and the oral cavity. Where do they sit approximately? Are there around there? Yeah, right here around the the lymph nodes more or less. You got it.

And there are two main ganglia that innervate the vast majority of all taste buds in the oral cavity. And then from there that sweet signal goes onto the brain stem. The brain stem is the entry of the body into the brain. And there are different areas of the brain stem and there are different groups of neurons in the brain stem. And there's a unique area in a unique topographically defined location in the rostral side of the brain stem that receives all of the taste input.

A very dense area of the brain. A very rich area of the brain. Exactly. And from there, this sweet signal goes to this other area higher up on the brain stem. And then it goes through a number of stations where that sweet signal goes from sweet neuron to sweet neuron to sweet neuron to eventually get to your cortex.

And once it gets to your taste cortex, that's where meaning is imposed into that signal. It's then this is what the data suggests that now you can identify this as a sweet stimuli and how quickly does that all happen? You know the time scale of the nervous system it's fast. Yeah. And within less than a second.

Yeah. And and in fact we can demonstrate this because we can stick electrodes at each of these stations. You deliver the stimuli and within a fraction of a second you see now the response in this following stations. Now it gets to the cortex and now in there you impose meaning to that taste. There's an area of your brain that represents the taste of sweet in taste cortex and a different area that represents the taste of bitter.

In essence, there is a topographic map of these taste qualities inside your brain.

## [00:11:56] Taste Plasticity \u0026 Changing Food Preferences

How much plasticity do you think there is there? And in particular across the lifespan because I think one of the most salient examples of this is that kids don't seem to like certain vegetables, but they all are hardwired to like sweet tastes. And yet you could also imagine that one of the reasons why they may eventually grow to incorporate vegetables is because of some knowledge that vegetables might be good for you, better for them. Is there a change in the receptors that can explain the transition from wanting to avoid vegetables to being willing to eat vegetables simply in childhood to to early development? It tastes we just told you that's you know predetermined hardwire but predetermined hardwire doesn't mean it's not modulated by learning or experience.

It only means that you are born liking sweet and dislike in bitter. And we have many examples of plasticity. Coffee, it has an associated gain to the system. And that gain to the system, that positive veilance that emerges out of that negative signal is sufficient to create that positive association. And in the case of coffee, of course, is caffeine in activating a whole group of neurotransmitter systems that give you that that that high associated with coffee.

So yes, this T system is changeable. It's malleable and is subjected to learning and experience. How much plasticity do you think there is there? And in particular across the lifespan because I think one of the most salient examples of this is that kids don't seem to like certain vegetables, but they all are hardwired to like sweet tastes. And yet you could also imagine that one of the reasons why they may eventually grow to incorporate vegetables is because of some knowledge that vegetables might be good for you, better for them.

Is there a change in the receptors that can explain the transition from wanting to avoid vegetables to being willing to eat vegetables simply in childhood to to early development? It tastes we just told you that's you know predetermined hardwire but predetermined hardwire doesn't mean it's not modulated by learning or experience. It only means that you are born liking sweet and dislike in bitter. And we have many examples of plasticity. Coffee, it has an associated gain to the system.

And that gain to the system, that positive veilance that emerges out of that negative signal is sufficient to create that positive association. And in the case of coffee, of course, is caffeine in activating a whole group of neurotransmitter systems that give you that that that high associated with coffee. So yes, this T system is changeable. It's malleable and is subjected to learning and experience.

## [00:13:22] Taste Modulation; Salt

Can you imagine a sort of a system by which people could leverage that where does this this desensitizing happens that's the term that we use I think it happening at multiple stations it's happening at the receptor level i.e. the cells in your tongue that are sensing that sugar as you activate this receptor and it's triggering activity after activity after activity eventually you exhaust the receptor again I'm using terms which are extraordinarily loose the receptor gets to a point where it under goes a set of changes chemical changes where it now signals far less efficiently or it even gets removed from the surface of the cell and that is a huge side of this modulation. And then the next I believe is the integrated again loss of signaling that happens by continuous activation of the circuit at each of these different neural stations from the tongue to the ganglia from the ganglia to the first station in the brain stem a second station in the brain stem to the phalamus then to the cortex. So there are multiple steps that this signal is traveling. Now you might say why if this is a label line why do you need to have so many stations and that's because the taste system is so important to ensure that you get what you need to survive that it has to be subjected to modulation by the internal state and each of these nodes provides a new site to give it plasticity and modulation I'm going to give you one example of of of how the internal state changes the way the taste system works.

works. Salt is very appetitive at low concentrations and that's because we need it. It's our electrolyte balance requires salt. Every one of their neurons uses salt as the most important of the ions, you know, with potassium to ensure that you can transfer these electrical signals within and between neurons. But at high concentrations, let's say ocean water is incredibly aversive.

And we all know this because we gone to the ocean and then when you get it in your mouth, it's not that great. However, if I salt deprive you now, this incredibly high concentration of salt, one molar sodium chloride, becomes amazingly appetitive and attractive. What's going on in here? Your tongue is telling you this is horrible, but your brain is telling you you need it. And this is what we call the modulation of the taste system by the internal state.

I'd love for you to talk about the aspects of gut brain signaling that Can you imagine a sort of a system by which people could leverage that where does this this desensitizing happens that's the term that we use I think it happening at multiple stations it's happening at the receptor level i.e. the cells in your tongue that are sensing that sugar as you activate this receptor and it's triggering activity after activity after activity eventually you exhaust the receptor again I'm using terms which are extraordinarily loose the receptor gets to a point where it under goes a set of changes chemical changes where it now signals far less efficiently or it even gets removed from the surface of the cell and that is a huge side of this modulation. And then the next I believe is the integrated again loss of signaling that happens by continuous activation of the circuit at each of these different neural stations from the tongue to the ganglia from the ganglia to the first station in the brain stem a second station in the brain stem to the phalamus then to the cortex. So there are multiple steps that this signal is traveling. Now you might say why if this is a label line why do you need to have so many stations and that's because the taste system is so important to ensure that you get what you need to survive that it has to be subjected to modulation by the internal state and each of these nodes provides a new site to give it plasticity and modulation I'm going to give you one example of of of how the internal state changes the way the taste system works.

works. Salt is very appetitive at low concentrations and that's because we need it. It's our electrolyte balance requires salt. Every one of their neurons uses salt as the most important of the ions, you know, with potassium to ensure that you can transfer these electrical signals within and between neurons. But at high concentrations, let's say ocean water is incredibly aversive.

And we all know this because we gone to the ocean and then when you get it in your mouth, it's not that great. However, if I salt deprive you now, this incredibly high concentration of salt, one molar sodium chloride, becomes amazingly appetitive and attractive. What's going on in here? Your tongue is telling you this is horrible, but your brain is telling you you need it. And this is what we call the modulation of the taste system by the internal state.

I'd love for you to talk about the aspects of gut brain signaling that

## [00:16:17] Gut-Brain Signaling

drive our or change our perceptions and behaviors that are completely beneath our awareness. Yes. You know, the brain needs to monitor the state of every one of our organs. It has to do it. This is the only way that the brain can ensure that every one of those organs are working together in a way that we have healthy physiology.

This is a two-way highway where the brain is not only monitoring but is now modulating back what the body needs to do. And that includes all the way from monitoring the frequency of heartbeats and the way that inspiration and aspirations in the breathing cycle operate to what happens when you ingest sugar and fat. Let me give you an example. So Pablo in his classical experiments in conditioning, you know, associative conditioning, he would take a bell, it will ring the bell every time he was going to feed the dog. Eventually the dog learn to associate the ringing of the bell with food coming.

The dog now in the presence of the bell alone will start to salivate and we will call that you know neurologically speaking an anticipatory response. Neurons in the brain that form that association now represent food is coming and they're sending a signal to motor neurons to go into your salivary glands to squeeze them. So you release you know you know saliva because you know food is coming. But what's even more remarkable is that those animals are also releasing insulin in response to a bell. Somehow the brain created these associations and there are neurons in your brain now that no food is coming and send a signal somehow all the way down to your pancreas that now it says release insulin because sugar is coming down.

Now the main highway that is communicating the state of the body with the brain is a specific bundle of nerves which emerge from the veagal ganglia the nos ganglia and so it's the vagus nerve that it's innervating the majority of the organs in your body it's monitoring their function sending a signal to the brain and now the brain going back down and saying this is going all right do this or this is not going to well do that and I should point out as you well know every organ spleen pancreas they all must they all must be monitored I have no doubt that diseases that we abnormally associated with metabolism physiology and even immunity are likely to emerge as diseases conditions states of the brain I don't think obesity is a disease of metabolism I believe obesity is a disease of brain circuits. I do as well. Yeah. And so this this view that we have, you know, been working on for the longest time because, you know, the molecules that we're dealing with are in the body, not in the head. You know, led us to, you know, to view, of course, these issues and problems as being one of metabolism, physiology, and so forth.

They remain to be the carriers of the ultimate signal. But the brain ultimately appears to be the conductor of this orchestra of physiology and metabolism. Now let's go to the gut brain and sugar. The vagus nerve is made out of many thousands of fibers that make this gigantic bundle. And it's likely as we're speaking that each of these fibers, they carry meaning that's associated with their specific task.

This group of fibers is telling the brain about the state of your heart. This group of fiber is telling the brain about the state of your gut. This is telling your brain about its nutritional state. They are again to make the same simple example the keys of this piano. Now the reason this is relevant because the magic of this gut brain axis is the fact that you have these thousands of fibers really doing different functions.

Okay, let me tell drive our or change our perceptions and behaviors that are completely beneath our awareness. Yes. You know, the brain needs to monitor the state of every one of our organs. It has to do it. This is the only way that the brain can ensure that every one of those organs are working together in a way that we have healthy physiology.

This is a two-way highway where the brain is not only monitoring but is now modulating back what the body needs to do. And that includes all the way from monitoring the frequency of heartbeats and the way that inspiration and aspirations in the breathing cycle operate to what happens when you ingest sugar and fat. Let me give you an example. So Pablo in his classical experiments in conditioning, you know, associative conditioning, he would take a bell, it will ring the bell every time he was going to feed the dog. Eventually the dog learn to associate the ringing of the bell with food coming.

The dog now in the presence of the bell alone will start to salivate and we will call that you know neurologically speaking an anticipatory response. Neurons in the brain that form that association now represent food is coming and they're sending a signal to motor neurons to go into your salivary glands to squeeze them. So you release you know you know saliva because you know food is coming. But what's even more remarkable is that those animals are also releasing insulin in response to a bell. Somehow the brain created these associations and there are neurons in your brain now that no food is coming and send a signal somehow all the way down to your pancreas that now it says release insulin because sugar is coming down.

Now the main highway that is communicating the state of the body with the brain is a specific bundle of nerves which emerge from the veagal ganglia the nos ganglia and so it's the vagus nerve that it's innervating the majority of the organs in your body it's monitoring their function sending a signal to the brain and now the brain going back down and saying this is going all right do this or this is not going to well do that and I should point out as you well know every organ spleen pancreas they all must they all must be monitored I have no doubt that diseases that we abnormally associated with metabolism physiology and even immunity are likely to emerge as diseases conditions states of the brain I don't think obesity is a disease of metabolism I believe obesity is a disease of brain circuits. I do as well. Yeah. And so this this view that we have, you know, been working on for the longest time because, you know, the molecules that we're dealing with are in the body, not in the head. You know, led us to, you know, to view, of course, these issues and problems as being one of metabolism, physiology, and so forth.

They remain to be the carriers of the ultimate signal. But the brain ultimately appears to be the conductor of this orchestra of physiology and metabolism. Now let's go to the gut brain and sugar. The vagus nerve is made out of many thousands of fibers that make this gigantic bundle. And it's likely as we're speaking that each of these fibers, they carry meaning that's associated with their specific task.

This group of fibers is telling the brain about the state of your heart. This group of fiber is telling the brain about the state of your gut. This is telling your brain about its nutritional state. They are again to make the same simple example the keys of this piano. Now the reason this is relevant because the magic of this gut brain axis is the fact that you have these thousands of fibers really doing different functions.

Okay, let me tell

## [00:20:50] Sugar Appetite \u0026 Gut-Brain Axis; Artificial Sweeteners, Sugar Cravings

you about the gut brain axis and our insatiable appetite for sugar. This is work of my own laboratory know that began long ago when we discovered the sweet receptors. You can now engineer mice that lack these receptors. So in essence, these animals will be unable to taste sweet. And if you give a normal mouse a bottle containing sweet and we're going to put either sugar or an artificial sweetener.

All right, they both are sweet. They have slightly different tastes, but that's simply because artificial sweeteners have some off tastes. But as far as the sweet receptor is concerned, they both activate the same receptor, trigger the same signal. And if you give an animal option of a bottle containing sugar or a sweetener versus water, this animal will drink 10 to one from the bottle containing sweet. That's the taste system.

it animal goes samples each one leaks a couple of leaks and then said uhuh that's the one I want because it's aitive and because I love it. Now we're going to take the mice and we're going to genetically engineer it to remove the sweet receptors. So these mice no longer have in their oral cavity any sensors that can detect sweetness, be that sugar molecule, be an artificial sweetener, be anything else that tastes sweet. And if you give this mice an option between sweet versus water, it will drink equally well from both because he cannot tell them apart because it doesn't have the receptors for sweet. So that sweet bottle tastes just like water.

But if I keep the mouse in that cage for the next 48 hours, something extraordinary happens. When I come 48 hours later, that mouse is drinking almost exclusively from the sugar bottle. During those 48 hours, the mouse learned that there is something in that bottle that makes me feel good. And that is the bottle I want to consume. And that is the fundamental basis of our unquenchable desire and our craving for sugar and is mediated by the gutbrain access.

So we reason if this is true and it's the gutb brain axis that's driving sugar preference then there should be a group of neurons in the brain that are responding to postingestive sugar and lo and behold we identify a group of neurons in the brain that does this and these neurons receive their input directly from the gut brain axis and so what's happening is that sugar is recognized ized normally by the tongue activates an appetitive response. Now you ingest it and now it activates a selective group of cells in your intestines that now send a signal to the brain via the veagal ganglia that says I got what I need. The tongue doesn't know that you got what you need. It only knows that you tasted it. This knows that it got to the point that it's going to be used, which is the gut.

And now it sends the signal to now reinforce the consumption of this thing because this is the one that I needed. Sugar source of energy. So these are gut cells that recognize the sugar molecule. I see. Send a signal and that signal is received by the veagal neuron directly.

Got it? And this sends a signal through the gutb brain axis to the cell bodies of these neurons in the veagal ganglia and from there to the brain stem to now trigger the preference for sugar. You see, you want the brain to know that you had successful ingestion and breakdown of whatever you consume into the building blocks of life and you know glucose, amino acids, fat and so you want to make sure that once they are in the form that intestines can now absorb them is where you get the signal back saying this what I want. Okay, now let me just take it one step further. This now sugar molecules activates this unique gut brain circuit that now drives the development of our preference for sugar.

A key element of this circuit is that the sensors in the gut that recognize the sugar do not recognize artificial sweeteners. It's a completely different molecule that only recognizes the glucose molecule, not artificial sweeteners. This has a profound impact on the effect of ultimately artificial sweeteners in curving our appetite, our craving, our insatiable desire for sugar since they don't activate the gut brain access. They'll never satisfy the craving for sugar like sugar does. We have a mega problem with overconumption of sugar and fat.

You know, we're facing a unique time in our evolution where diseases of malnutrition are due to over nutrition. Historically, diseases of malnutritions have always been linked to under nutrition. But I want to just go back to the notion of, you about the gut brain axis and our insatiable appetite for sugar. This is work of my own laboratory know that began long ago when we discovered the sweet receptors. You can now engineer mice that lack these receptors.

So in essence, these animals will be unable to taste sweet. And if you give a normal mouse a bottle containing sweet and we're going to put either sugar or an artificial sweetener. All right, they both are sweet. They have slightly different tastes, but that's simply because artificial sweeteners have some off tastes. But as far as the sweet receptor is concerned, they both activate the same receptor, trigger the same signal.

And if you give an animal option of a bottle containing sugar or a sweetener versus water, this animal will drink 10 to one from the bottle containing sweet. That's the taste system. it animal goes samples each one leaks a couple of leaks and then said uhuh that's the one I want because it's aitive and because I love it. Now we're going to take the mice and we're going to genetically engineer it to remove the sweet receptors. So these mice no longer have in their oral cavity any sensors that can detect sweetness, be that sugar molecule, be an artificial sweetener, be anything else that tastes sweet.

And if you give this mice an option between sweet versus water, it will drink equally well from both because he cannot tell them apart because it doesn't have the receptors for sweet. So that sweet bottle tastes just like water. But if I keep the mouse in that cage for the next 48 hours, something extraordinary happens. When I come 48 hours later, that mouse is drinking almost exclusively from the sugar bottle. During those 48 hours, the mouse learned that there is something in that bottle that makes me feel good.

And that is the bottle I want to consume. And that is the fundamental basis of our unquenchable desire and our craving for sugar and is mediated by the gutbrain access. So we reason if this is true and it's the gutb brain axis that's driving sugar preference then there should be a group of neurons in the brain that are responding to postingestive sugar and lo and behold we identify a group of neurons in the brain that does this and these neurons receive their input directly from the gut brain axis and so what's happening is that sugar is recognized ized normally by the tongue activates an appetitive response. Now you ingest it and now it activates a selective group of cells in your intestines that now send a signal to the brain via the veagal ganglia that says I got what I need. The tongue doesn't know that you got what you need.

It only knows that you tasted it. This knows that it got to the point that it's going to be used, which is the gut. And now it sends the signal to now reinforce the consumption of this thing because this is the one that I needed. Sugar source of energy. So these are gut cells that recognize the sugar molecule.

I see. Send a signal and that signal is received by the veagal neuron directly. Got it? And this sends a signal through the gutb brain axis to the cell bodies of these neurons in the veagal ganglia and from there to the brain stem to now trigger the preference for sugar. You see, you want the brain to know that you had successful ingestion and breakdown of whatever you consume into the building blocks of life and you know glucose, amino acids, fat and so you want to make sure that once they are in the form that intestines can now absorb them is where you get the signal back saying this what I want.

Okay, now let me just take it one step further. This now sugar molecules activates this unique gut brain circuit that now drives the development of our preference for sugar. A key element of this circuit is that the sensors in the gut that recognize the sugar do not recognize artificial sweeteners. It's a completely different molecule that only recognizes the glucose molecule, not artificial sweeteners. This has a profound impact on the effect of ultimately artificial sweeteners in curving our appetite, our craving, our insatiable desire for sugar since they don't activate the gut brain access.

They'll never satisfy the craving for sugar like sugar does. We have a mega problem with overconumption of sugar and fat. You know, we're facing a unique time in our evolution where diseases of malnutrition are due to over nutrition. Historically, diseases of malnutritions have always been linked to under nutrition. But I want to just go back to the notion of,

## [00:26:34] Taste \u0026 Essential Nutrients; Highly Processed Foods; Brain \u0026 Food Choices

you know, these brain centers that are ultimately the ones that are being activated by these essential nutrients. So sugar, fat and amino acids are building blocks of our diets and this is across all animal species. So it's not unreasonable then to assume that dedicated brain circuits would have evolved to ensure their recognition, their ingestion and the reinforcement that that is what I need. And indeed, you know, animals evolve these two systems. One is the taste system that allows you to recognize them and trigger this predetermined hardwire immediate responses.

Yes. You know, oh my god, this is so delicious. It's fatty or umami recognizing amino acids. So that's the liking pathway. But in the wisdom of evolution, that's good, but doesn't quite do it.

You want to make sure that these things get to the place where they're needed. They are needed in your intestines where they're going to be absorbed as the nutrients that will support life. And the brain wants to know this. Highly processed foods are hijacking, you know, co-opting these circuits in a way that they would have never happened in nature. And then we not only find these things appetitive and palatable but in addition we are continuously reinforcing you know the wanting in a way that oh my god this is so great what do I feel like eating let me have more of this.

Well, this is why I think a lot of data are now starting to support the idea that while indeed the laws of thermodynamics apply, calories ingested versus calories burned is a very real thing, right? The appetite for certain foods and the the wanting and the liking are phenomena of the nervous system, brain and gut as you've beautifully described and that that changes over time depending on how we are receiving these nutrients. Absolutely. Understanding these circuits is giving us important insights and how ultimately hopefully we can improve human health and make a meaningful difference. Now, it's very easy to try to, you know, connect the dots A to B, B to C, C to D.

And I think there's a lot more complexity to it. But I do think that the lessons that are emerging out of understanding how these circuits operate can ultimately inform how we deal with our diets in a way that we avoid what we're facing now, you know, as a society. I mean, it's nuts that the over nutrition happens to be such a prevalent problem. Yeah. And I also think the training of people who are thinking about metabolic science and metabolic disease is largely divorced from the training of the neuroscientist and vice versa.

No one field is to blame. But I fully agree that the the brain is is the key over or the nervous system to be more accurate is the one of the key overlooked features is the arbiter ultimately is the arbiter of many of these pathways. On behalf of you know, these brain centers that are ultimately the ones that are being activated by these essential nutrients. So sugar, fat and amino acids are building blocks of our diets and this is across all animal species. So it's not unreasonable then to assume that dedicated brain circuits would have evolved to ensure their recognition, their ingestion and the reinforcement that that is what I need.

And indeed, you know, animals evolve these two systems. One is the taste system that allows you to recognize them and trigger this predetermined hardwire immediate responses. Yes. You know, oh my god, this is so delicious. It's fatty or umami recognizing amino acids.

So that's the liking pathway. But in the wisdom of evolution, that's good, but doesn't quite do it. You want to make sure that these things get to the place where they're needed. They are needed in your intestines where they're going to be absorbed as the nutrients that will support life. And the brain wants to know this.

Highly processed foods are hijacking, you know, co-opting these circuits in a way that they would have never happened in nature. And then we not only find these things appetitive and palatable but in addition we are continuously reinforcing you know the wanting in a way that oh my god this is so great what do I feel like eating let me have more of this. Well, this is why I think a lot of data are now starting to support the idea that while indeed the laws of thermodynamics apply, calories ingested versus calories burned is a very real thing, right? The appetite for certain foods and the the wanting and the liking are phenomena of the nervous system, brain and gut as you've beautifully described and that that changes over time depending on how we are receiving these nutrients. Absolutely.

Understanding these circuits is giving us important insights and how ultimately hopefully we can improve human health and make a meaningful difference. Now, it's very easy to try to, you know, connect the dots A to B, B to C, C to D. And I think there's a lot more complexity to it. But I do think that the lessons that are emerging out of understanding how these circuits operate can ultimately inform how we deal with our diets in a way that we avoid what we're facing now, you know, as a society. I mean, it's nuts that the over nutrition happens to be such a prevalent problem.

Yeah. And I also think the training of people who are thinking about metabolic science and metabolic disease is largely divorced from the training of the neuroscientist and vice versa. No one field is to blame. But I fully agree that the the brain is is the key over or the nervous system to be more accurate is the one of the key overlooked features is the arbiter ultimately is the arbiter of many of these pathways. On behalf of

## [00:30:07] Acknowledgements

myself and certainly on behalf of all the listeners, I want to thank you first of all for the incredible work that you've been doing now for decades in vision, in taste and in this bigger issue of how we perceive and experience life. It's uh truly pioneering and incredible work. And I feel quite lucky to have been on the sidelines seeing this over the years and hearing the talks and reading the countless beautiful papers, but also for your time today to come down here and talk to us about what drives you and the discoveries you've made. Thank you ever so much. It was great fun.

Thank you for having me. We'll do it again. I wish all myself and certainly on behalf of all the listeners, I want to thank you first of all for the incredible work that you've been doing now for decades in vision, in taste and in this bigger issue of how we perceive and experience life. It's uh truly pioneering and incredible work. And I feel quite lucky to have been on the sidelines seeing this over the years and hearing the talks and reading the countless beautiful papers, but also for your time today to come down here and talk to us about what drives you and the discoveries you've made.

Thank you ever so much. It was great fun. Thank you for having me. We'll do it again. I wish all
