---
title: "The Science & Practice of Movement | Ido Portal"
type: transcript
episode_date: 2022-06-20
episode_number: 77
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
  - Ido Portal
youtube_id: a9yFKPmPZ90
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:00] Ido Portal, Movement & Movement Practice

**Andrew Huberman:** Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine.

Today, my guest is Ido Portal. Ido Portal is somebody who truly defies formal definition. He is, however, accredited by many to be the world expert in all things movement. Movement is one of the more fascinating and important aspects of our nervous system. In fact, it was the great Nobel Prize winner Sherrington that said, "Movement is the final common path." And what he was referring to is the fact that so much of our nervous system is dedicated to movement and, in particular, that the human nervous system can generate the greatest variety of forms of movement. We can run, we can jump, we can crawl, we can move at different speeds — far more variation in movement and different types and speeds of movement than any other animal in the animal kingdom can perform.

My interest in bringing Ido Portal onto this podcast stemmed from a discussion about just that — about Sherrington and the enormous range of movements that humans can engage in. Ido is both a practitioner and an intellectual. We all know what a practitioner is — it's somebody who walks the walk, who actually performs the thing that they are knowledgeable about. And indeed, Ido has studied capoeira, a number of other martial arts, dance, gymnastics, various forms of sport. He's trained top athletes like Conor McGregor and has many, many other credits to his name as a practitioner and teacher.

However, he is also a true intellectual of movement. I define an intellectual as somebody who can both think about and talk about a subject at multiple levels of granularity — with exquisite detail and with exquisite simplicity depending on their audience and depending on the topic at hand. And as you'll soon hear from my discussion with Ido, he is both a practitioner and a true intellectual of all things movement.

Today, through our discussion, you will learn how the nervous system generates movement and the different forms of movement, the different speeds of movement. You're also going to get an incredible insight through Ido's mind and eyes of how movement can serve us in the various contexts of life — not just in sport, not just in exercise, but in every aspect of our lives from the time we get up in the morning until the time we go to sleep at night. How we engage with others, how we engage with ourselves, how movement even informs relationships of different kinds.

I found our discussion to be one of the most enlightening and interesting discussions that I've ever had, not just about movement, but about the nervous system. I can assure you that by the end of this episode, you will not only learn a tremendous amount about movement through the eyes and mind of the one and only Ido Portal, but you also will learn a tremendous amount of neuroscience about how the cells, and circuits, and hormones, and neurotransmitters of your body assist in creating the various forms of movement that you can generate. And you'll learn some protocols and tools for how to do that.

In science, we have a phrase, actually it's a title, that's reserved for only the rarest of individuals — we say that somebody is an n-of-1, meaning a sample size of one. And as you'll soon learn, Ido Portal is truly an n-of-1. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.

## [00:03:30] AG1 (Athletic Greens), ROKA, Helix Sleep

**Andrew Huberman:** It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.

Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. When people ask me what's the one supplement they should take, I always say Athletic Greens because it covers all of those essential nutritional bases. Your gut microbiome is trillions of little microbacteria that live in your gut and that support your immune system, your endocrine system, and the so-called gut-brain axis, which is important for mood and neurotransmitter production. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer — five free travel packs and a year supply of vitamin D3, K2.

Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses of the absolute highest quality and practicality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges. ROKA understands those challenges and they've developed sunglasses and eyeglasses with all of that biology in mind. Their glasses were developed by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and are designed to stay on your face if you get sweaty — very lightweight and terrific aesthetics so you can wear them anywhere. Go to roka.com and enter the code HUBERMAN to get 20% off your first order.

Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows customized to your sleep needs. Sleep is the foundation of all mental health, physical health, and performance. You can take the Helix two-minute quiz at helixsleep.com/huberman to be matched to your ideal mattress and get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows.

And now, for my discussion with Ido Portal. Ido, thank you for coming here today.

## [00:07:49] What is Movement?

**Andrew Huberman:** I've been looking forward to sitting down with you to talk for a very long time. I was first exposed to your work from a podcast of you that had a group of people walking down handrails — literally the handrails along stairwells. As a skateboarder, handrails have a particular meaning, but I was really struck by the incredible range of skill that people had and yet their willingness to do this. But over the years, we've been in communication and I've come to realize that you're a true intellectual of the topic of movement. So to start off, could you share with us your conception of this idea of movement? Obviously movement involves translation through space, but when you talk about a movement practice, what are you really thinking about?

**Ido Portal:** It's a big question. I somehow left the definition, the very tight definition of it out for myself because I felt it was starting to constrict me, and I let the practice itself really define it. But I think part of our sense of everything is actually a sense of movement and then the stillness in the background of that. So for me, this is the entity that I refer to as movement — and using that perspective for self-evolution development. Of course, the physical side, but also movement of emotions, movement of thoughts, and any other movement streams. And by switching these layers and examining it from different places, you get a better and better sense of it. There is some aspect, sexy aspect or not so sexy aspect, and then you pull on it and you start to examine and dive deeper, and then you receive the gift of it, finding out more.

## [00:10:56] Movement & the Body-Mind Connection

**Andrew Huberman:** I heard you say once that we are not just a brain with a body, but we are a body with a brain, which I absolutely love because as a student and researcher of the nervous system, I never think about the brain as its own isolated thing. I think about the nervous system and the fact that the brain and the spinal cord are connected to the body, and the body is connected to the brain — and in every direction, everything truly is connected at the physical level, physiological level. Could you share for a moment how you think about this body-brain relationship in terms of movement of emotions, movement of the body? When we do a movement practice, are you focusing on the movement of your limbs? Are you also focusing on how that makes you feel or how your feelings make you move?

**Ido Portal:** Some thoughts — I will try not to answer any of your questions during this interview, but I will definitely give some thoughts and then we can play with it. I think these definitions and, in general, the limitation of words ends up creating some kind of a corruptive process. Words corrupt us and corrupt our understanding. So I think the brain-body, this Cartesian state of mind and thinking brought a lot of good, but also brought a lot of problems. And movement, for me, is the entity that ties everything together. It's the magic, it's the thoughts anima — it's when the coin spins and you see both sides appear at the same time. That's a beautiful analogy from a friend of mine, Dr. Rasmus Olme. So the mind and body are one of those pairs, and I call it the movement/body/mind system — it's when it's integrated, it's in motion.

There is also a stillness that appears there, of course, and without it there can be no motion. There is no really pure mental processes, cognitive processes. There is no pure physical processes — everything touches everything, there is a wholeness, and that wholeness is in motion. The movement practice takes these beats and examines them. Here is a pragmatic thing: the scientist, the cerebral thinking about movement, this is important. The emotional side coloring, feeling the colors and the textures of motion — a lot of people who are involved with a movement practice never end up feeling motions, really focusing on how it makes you feel or how it feels itself. And then the actual movement, the action. So it's action, emotion, and thought — three streams of movement that interlay together into a braided experience. And I try to bring all these aspects into my practice and the way that I live my life.

## [00:14:47] Entry Points to Movement

**Andrew Huberman:** I think most people who embark on a movement practice will first want to know which movements to do — squats, planks, push-ups, pirouettes. Are there any basic entry points that you believe everybody should walk through as they embrace a movement practice? Earlier today I had the great privilege of being guided through a long series of movement practices, and yet the first practice we did involved, at first anyway, stillness not movement. Could you inform us how people should think about approaching a movement practice?

**Ido Portal:** So you touched the word movement, and it's important for me to separate it from the word Movement with a capital M. Movements are the containers and movement is the content, and the content cannot be carried in any way without containers. So the first entry point is to choose containers, and then the second thing is to make sure to put specific content into those containers and then enjoy them. I tell people it's like a cup of water and you're being handed that cup of water — nowadays very often people will start to chew on the cup instead of drinking the water, making it yours and discarding the cup. And then maybe later you want to have bone broth or soup so you use a different container, a bowl. So a movement practice can start from anywhere — it's a rhizome, it's an open system, it has no center, it's decentralized, and it can be approached from anywhere.

Some people find the body a good entry point; some people don't even enter from the body. Sometimes you can enter from other perspectives. Inside the body, for example, the spine can be a nice decision, but some will choose just the pelvis. Any one of those points are valid. And then playfulness can be an entry point, an attribute — this is so open. So I don't want to limit people and limit their minds in the way that they engage with the practice, but I also want to encourage the self-inquiry. Am I doing movements practice, or am I doing a movement practice?

**Andrew Huberman:** Could you help me distinguish the two a little bit further? In some ways here we are dealing with the challenge of the barriers that language presents to something that's physical. I could say somebody jumped at a particular trajectory at a particular speed and moved this limb and that limb, but by fractionating it something is most definitely lost.

## [00:18:08] Early Education in Movement: Awareness, Play & Examination

**Andrew Huberman:** So if someone wanted to get in better touch with their body in order to explore the infinite space that is movement, how might they begin to approach that? Is it an awareness, with practice, or both?

**Ido Portal:** It begins with education. That's probably the most stable point of entry. I believe in the power of the non-complete process — like making this table, but living something undone, not perfecting the product. Why? Because it offers some kind of a dynamic nature of evolution that naturally unravels from it. Almost like sometimes I count reps and I'll only count to nine, because it tends to leave people in the count and it keeps going instead of giving them the 10.

**Andrew Huberman:** Everyone wants to end on 10.

**Ido Portal:** Yeah, which is because of the decimal system, et cetera. So all kinds of things like that are also important with the movement idea — to discuss, to examine, to look, to taste, to try, but then also not to try to capture. Because if you look at it too closely, it's gone, but if you look away, it functions and exists, just like us, very powerfully. So when people enter movement practice, it is about education — bringing some awareness to the fact that they are living in a body, that they are living in motion, that their mind is a type of movement, that their life is a type of movement. Bringing attention to the movement of the emotions as well. The Heraclitus panta rhei — all in flux, nothing stops besides something that is the background of it and allows it to express. And this for me is the movement practice — this examination and bringing this awareness into things. As we sit here now, I'm also aware of my body, I'm also aware of the way that things make me feel, the way that your face is communicating to me. And I'm not just in some limited and very verbal, overly verbal state.

## [00:21:19] Stillness, Movement & the Environment, Playfulness

**Andrew Huberman:** As I understand what we're talking about now and what we've discussed earlier is that movement can and should be incorporated into one's entire life. I've even heard you say that even before getting out of bed in the morning, one can experience movement — paying attention to the rhythm of one's breath, or how you get out of bed. In anticipation of you arriving here today, I noticed that as I was going up and down the stairs in this house, that I was injecting a little bit of playfulness in the way that I might have many, many decades ago, but haven't for a very long time. Maybe you could share a few ideas to get people thinking about incorporating movement practice into their day, and maybe even touch on the potential role of play or playfulness.

**Ido Portal:** I think one thing is what you call wordlessness. I have been recommending to people non-verbal experiences and the awareness of the body — which is not really purely the awareness of the body, as you know, not fully. The awareness of motion is a very good way to start to bring awareness to that layer. And that layer will start to get clarified more and more, the more you practice. And then it will enable for most people a safe haven away from many states and difficulties, and will unlock a lot of potential attributes, strength, freshness, and a lot of beautiful things.

Really one of the really interesting perspectives about who we are comes from a person who influenced my thinking a lot — Moshe Feldenkrais, the late Moshe Feldenkrais. He talks about the body as having three core elements: the nervous system, the mechanical system of muscle and skeleton, and the environment — which is a unique way to look at it. He talks about how the nervous system is both receiving information from the outside and from the inside. And in the first years of life, you work a lot on differentiating those — what is me and what is not me? And I think movement, when you feel movement, you feel the movement of the outside that is arriving to you, and also your own internal movement.

How, for example — simple, pragmatic things. I spent some time in Hong Kong. I would need to get my practice in but I'm really turned off from commercial gyms, and there is not a lot of nature accessible there. So I would just strap on my bag and I would walk the streets of Hong Kong, which are very crowded, and I would try to avoid touching anyone. And it would be like two hours of just moving, fully involved, fully in my body, experiencing beautiful things, and developing myself as well. Up and down in the escalators and off. This is an example of a way to practice.

And then the way that we are sitting — like these chairs, for example, our chairs are not very dynamic, but there are rocking chairs. And this is something I recommend for a lot of kids, like in schools. I used to rock on the chair, which is very common.

**Andrew Huberman:** I used to put my skateboard underneath my chair and roll it back and forth, and the teacher would tell me to stop. And I would just slowly try to get the most subtle movement I could without them noticing.

**Ido Portal:** Which is probably horrible instruction — just sit up straight and chew with your mouth closed — because they remove a lot of the self-education and a lot of the self-development and the practical discoveries that are necessary. It can even damage focus and thinking processes in some ways. So for example, I would make the chairs even more mobile and I would support more motion. And then I would be able to bring attention there, but I would also be able to bring attention away from it into other things. And it keeps refreshing me so I don't become stale. The water doesn't stand — this is the beauty of movement. So you can focus for long periods of time and do incredible things with the mind, with focus, with awareness and attention.

It's like we're skin in the game, so I'm not talking as some meditator describing the act of being very focused, but then I put a stick on the edge of his fingers and I tell him, "Balance it." Everyone can do it for 10 seconds but if you tell him "Hold it 10 minutes," you see that the skill has never been developed in various scenarios, but there is a delusion that starts to develop. That's how movement keeps me very honest and humble and keeps me fresh.

**Andrew Huberman:** I loved the example of moving through the crowded street with a backpack because of the way in which it's completely adaptive to the situation you happened to be in and highlights the fact that one doesn't need a gym or any specific scenario.

**Ido Portal:** The less of your own personal practice, understanding, and knowledge you've done, the more toys you need. The more you've really worked on yourself, the more high-tech you are — and the more low-tech are your tools. This is the most advanced technology by far on this planet. With all the advancement, it doesn't even start to scratch. A 5-year-old motion versus all the Boston Robotics developments — so important to remind ourselves.

A lot can be done with the body and gravity. A piece of floor, a piece of wall, a corner of a room is a beautiful scenario in which you can discover and play. But we are not so developed so we don't see those options. And this is something I try to stimulate — that's why I made it a point to avoid any of the big sponsorship and high-tech tools. I on point brought a stick into big conventions, or sometimes I use a shirt with holes in it — just a used shirt as a point to make when I'm addressing a crowd. We are important and our experience is important. And we have to be very careful — these habits and these directions, they come from many times good intention, but they turn into the devil many times. Just like our technology nowadays and what is happening with people and with depression, with meaning, with the body in various perspectives. Even I will flip it into high-performance sports and their price. For me, this is not a movement practice — it erases the person in the center of it. And then came places like skateboarding or break dancing where somebody with a disability becomes the best in the world, turns it into the biggest advantage — but you would never be accepted into gymnastics class. And I love that. The change to place the person in the center — it's important.

## [00:31:34] Unique Postures, Types of Movement, Contents vs. Containers

**Andrew Huberman:** Maybe it was Charles Poliquin, or maybe it was another trainer, that said for kids one of the worst things they can do is overspecialize in a particular sport. The idea being that it leads to improvements in performance in a very narrow domain, but it could also constrain the development of the nervous system, such that certain emotional states, certain intellectual abilities will forever be shut off because of the intense plasticity that occurs early in life. The more I learn from you, the more I'm thinking that statement should be extended to all of life. Our life is one long developmental arc from birth until death. So if one is going to be anti-specialist — a generalist — what does that look like? What are the different domains of movement practice?

**Ido Portal:** First I'll address the first part you mentioned. And you're right, it is something that Charles Poliquin also mentioned and I learned from back in the day — which can seem dark and kind of hopeless. But then you should go beyond that. One thing that does seem to appear for me when I look around is the concept of unique postures. And I think this is true for postures of thought, emotional postures, and movement postures. Truly, earlier in life, we are creating these unique postures and they get into these drawers or like language letters. Later in life, the process moves more towards integration of these unique postures into all different organizations. The beauty of it is that you can use very few postures to create many possibilities, just like a language needs letters.

This is really problematic — where we are not freeing the mind beyond this scaffolding of thinking. And we are actually letting go of the content. We get more and more focused on the way of thinking versus the thinking itself, habitual ways and forms of thinking. And emotionally the same — we are constructing these emotional postures and then we have to go through the rest of our lives working with that. So this is the dark side. But of course there are always possibilities — both I think invading this early system to some extent, even if it's 5% or 7%, and also on the freeing yourself of going beyond all postures. Working with the postures you have, but towards a postureless way of doing things.

When people work with movements but finally are able to go into movement, this magic starts to happen — the techniques fall apart and something appears, and it's a face change, it's a transformation, it's a binary moment. There is a jump there for sure. And it's very rare to see both in thinking, and emotionally, and other ways. We have many names for it — some talk about enlightenment, and some talk about all kinds of processes related to it.

Talking about ways of thinking about movement — this is where I use something I call my slice and dice. Because of the problem of using words and definitions and categories, I try to create a lot of them and I write them on paper and then I crumble them, throw them into the bin, and I keep doing it all my life. The writing them down and the geeking on it is very important — also very important to let it go. I tell people what you forgot is not the same as never knowing it. The crumbling and throwing away is a form of forgetting, but it leaves some kind of a homeopathic trace behind.

So let's take some slice and dice and try to look at it. Here is a physical one — contraction, relaxation. That's a spectrum, and pretty much everything falls on this spectrum. You can tell me if you feel closer to this side or closer to that side, and then it allows you to examine your practices. How many of the practices are moving you towards balance and how many are your addiction of just doing what you're good at versus what you need?

Here is another example, physical culture. So we have: the dense realm — working with internal concepts and expressing them; abstract concepts, expression. Second perspective — the martial concept, but not in the sense of just fighting, but also partnering, working with another person, a dynamic entity that is communicating with you. Third one — the elements, working with the environment. The next one is a somatic one, the internal practice. And of course there are all gray zones, and another one is object manipulatory — working with small objects, heavy objects, many objects, few objects. And then you can look at this way of thinking and say, "Oh, I have many of my practices in this direction but not others," and you can draw it for yourself. With the years, it gives people a sense of where they want to go, how they want to do it, and what they need to address versus what they like to address.

**Andrew Huberman:** Very helpful. I really appreciate that you mentioned that people will often practice what they're good at as opposed to what they need. In gym culture, we refer to this as the guy who always skips leg day. Or you'll see people that have these enormous thick torsos and they're bench pressing all day, but they clearly need to pull on an object every once in a while to create some balance.

## [00:40:50] Discomfort: Marker of Movement, Failures & Learning

**Andrew Huberman:** I think that it's really important in intellectual endeavors and in movement endeavors to bring oneself to a place of real challenge on a regular basis. Earlier today, I was in a state of constant challenge because it was all new to me. And as much as I told myself "beginners' mind, beginners' mind, beginners' mind," it's hard, I confess, to not want to perform well.

**Ido Portal:** Not only natural — it is necessary. But I want you to keep it on that side and to bring something to balance it. If there is not this challenge, the process will not work. It has to be this scale. And you're talking about scales of pain and pleasure. This discomfort again is necessary and should be recognized as, "I'm in the right place." When it becomes too high and I'm unable to resolve, to make any progress, I went overboard. But when it's not present, nothing is happening that I'm truly interested in — I'm just gratifying myself. It's wankery. It's not about searching for the discomfort, but it's a marker. And I think the question should be who am I serving? Because people do not serve themselves, in essence — they serve parts, some kind of a fraction of themselves.

And this separation of oneself from oneself is also a result of the practice, a good practice. I think maybe the biggest gift I received from the practice — I can say — is that I am not my friend. At times I am, but many times I am not my friend. And by creating this separation, I can assume a certain stability in the face of everything, all the way up to our own mortality and death, and maybe beyond.

**Andrew Huberman:** It was a striking moment for me earlier today when I was really challenged with one of the practices we were doing, and you said, "This is exactly what I experienced this morning, Andrew." And I couldn't imagine that you were having challenges doing what I was attempting to do. And of course you were. I believe what you were referring to is that you had put yourself at that edge earlier in the day in which you were making failures, you were failing to execute the way that you were attempting to execute movement.

Let me inject some neuroscience and neuroplasticity there. There are beautiful data in animals and humans showing that in the seconds and minutes after a failed attempt at motor execution of something, the forebrain is in a heightened state of focus. And when you hear it, suddenly it makes perfect sense — of course, why would the nervous system change unless it got a cue to change? And the cue almost always comes in the form of frustration, that "nah" signal which preps you to extract more learning from the subsequent trials. And yet, for a lot of people, they feel that failure to execute, and they lean out of the practice. If there's anything that perhaps we can offer, it's this understanding that those failures aren't just necessary — they are the entry gate to neuroplasticity.

**Ido Portal:** Yes, contextualizing or recontextualizing that sensation is something I work a lot with. I just remind people — and also remind myself — if it wasn't difficult and we didn't need to redo it again and again, we wouldn't be on this correct scale which is dynamic and moving, just like rolling downhill. So there is definitely a necessity to succeed, to orient, there are certain aspects that you want to achieve, but then there is also the letting go of it and the de-ambitioning of it. And within that tension — the plus and the minus — comes movement. And that's how I do it. And again, if I stretch it too far away, or if I increase one of them too much, then I would have some issues, but you will with practice learn to recognize the optimal point of progression.

Of course, it takes many years and a lot of play and exposure to get a sense of it, regardless of the layer in which it is applied. The one who changes all the time gets the general component — because what appears when everything changes? That is that new entity. Everything changes, something stays. That's what we want to get — this concept and this understanding.

## [00:47:05] Movement Diversity, Squat Challenge, Injury, Movement Evolution

**Andrew Huberman:** We're just a sack of cells — I truly despise that statement because, first of all, it deprives us of all meaning in our lives. More importantly, it divorces us from the idea that the body and brain are interconnected and have at least equal value, informing each other. One thing that I've heard you say before and I'd really love to hear you embellish on is this important principle that human beings are truly unique in terms of the enormous range of movements that we can perform. A cheetah is very fast, the gibbon seems to have a lot of proficiency at grabbing and swinging from branches — but human beings can potentially perform an enormous array of movements. Do you think all human beings are potentially able to explore all the different types of movement?

**Ido Portal:** First, it's not important what I think if it's possible or not possible — what is important is what you truly want to do, what you truly are after. I like to say a man doesn't go to the ocean to empty it with a spoon. For example, in Scandinavian countries, the squat is not very approachable, it's very difficult. They're more built for dragging heavy things. And then you see the squat in warm climates and it's like so open and accessible. They're very good deadlifters usually, not good squatters. The shallow hip socket allows one activity, but then the stability of the deep hip socket, the architecture of the hip, the femur heads, the Q angles, the shapes — we are all unique, and there are certain elements which, for example, my squat challenge is like — for most people there is something there.

**Andrew Huberman:** Could you remind people what the squat challenge is?

**Ido Portal:** The squat was my attempt to bring a new, fresh state of mind into the word squat — not as a strength element, but as a fundamental resting position. Actually, it should be one of the most abundant ones. We replaced it with sitting, which doesn't work well in a natural environment — it's not very comfortable actually to sit for long periods of time on rocks and different terrains, so you end up lying down, standing, and squatting a lot. Also, when you're moving low and dynamic, like even collecting berries, the squat is much more dynamic and open. And then elimination is happening there, so it's like it's such a fundamental thing and we totally eliminated it. We eliminated many other things — overhead movements, behind the back, all kinds of back realm movements that are totally absent in people's awareness.

So that was my attempt to bring it back into people. I recommended, in order to really get the transformation, accumulating 30 minutes a day in the squat position — unloaded, just resting down there. Not correct, not erect — many people make this mistake, they didn't read through the whole thing. It's just resting down there. And of course, you have to be mindful of dosages. Some people will get hurt if they try to do it too quickly, so they might need a build-up process towards it. And also, I'm not talking about 30 minutes straight, but accumulation throughout the day.

This does a lot of good for digestive problems, for lower back pain, for hip pains, for knees, and generally for aging because it's basically folding your body in the most basic way. Are you folding your body? If you're not folding your body, you will lose the foldability of your body. And this is probably the easiest and the most abundant way to fold the body. But this is an example of something that can be very useful with many, many people, but there will always be unique individuals who need something else.

## [00:56:36] Animal & Human Movements, Gain & Change

**Andrew Huberman:** Do you think there's value in observing the movements of other animal species? I know I certainly enjoy watching other animals move. I think one of the more spectacular animal facts shared with me is when I was a graduate student — someone down the hall was working on the little pedals of the chameleon, which can walk up walls. It was a great mystery as to whether or not they were suction, but turns out they can do it in a vacuum. Those little tiny pedals are so thin and so close together that the chameleon actually sticks to the wall by what are called van der Waals forces — a very weak molecular force, but strong enough to stick to the wall because they are actually exchanging molecules with the surface they're on. I spent hours watching videos of these little chameleons walk. So the question is, do you think there's value in observing the extremes of animal kingdom movement as a way to inform the play space and the exploration space of our own human movement practice?

**Ido Portal:** I think so. I think first it's inspiring, it opens up — but I will take it away from the romantic point of view and offer another way to examine. All these movements exist in us in ways, in certain ways. Like the work of Gracovetsky on the spine, "The Spinal Engine," to see how these old ways of moving even all the way up to exoskeletons and like primary, very ancient or even single-cell things are still within us to a certain extent.

And then of course this gets developed. The Darwinian state of mind got stuck for many years on the survival of the fittest. But actually I believe — and I always believed and I saw some information about it lately — that mutation is the heart of the model, not survival of the fittest.

**Andrew Huberman:** People often hear the word mutation and they think mutations are bad. There are maladaptive mutations and there are adaptive mutations, for sure.

**Ido Portal:** And then this places the word change in the heart of it — what it wants to do is change. So it does not want to become better, there is an inherent change in it. And then of course they become better at X, Y, Z — fittest is the secondary perspective that arrives in relation to certain things, but there is still a stronger, more ancient driving force into the process.

So for me, this is cool to see these animals take it all the way to this extreme, but it's also still reflecting within us. So I love to do, like for example, I introduce with people spinal waves. And by bringing these waves into the body, sometimes you get weird experiences like emotional releases. And sometimes it can become an incredible tool to help an athlete who has specialized and reached the top of the top — you defrag his system a little bit and offer him some freshness and some segmental movement. And first you mess him up — that's usually the case. Technically he's off, his coordination is off — but later the growth will arrive. It's a form of playfulness, a form of examining things regardless of their success or failure. Change is important, and then after that, we can also look at the more competitive state of mind and the success and failure orientation. But there is no game without change. To sustain the game means to continue to change, continue to transform. And then to win the game sometimes means game over. So within that tension, I think it's beautiful to play, and to exist, and to be.

## [01:02:04] Core Movement, Emotion & Memory, Spinal Waves, Evolution

**Andrew Huberman:** You mentioned spinal waves. I'll stay away from the technical anatomy and just say the torso and creating movement — either side to side undulation or arching and extension of the spine.

**Ido Portal:** Yeah, dorsal, ventral, side to side, or rotational as well as spiraling.

**Andrew Huberman:** Have you ever had the experience of yourself or other people engaging in those types of movements and experiencing particular categories of emotions? Is there any evidence that movement of the core of the body — things close to the midline as opposed to far away from the midline like the digits — can evoke a certain category of emotional states?

**Ido Portal:** Evidence, I have none — but I have experience and I have some thoughts about it. Ida Rolf is known to have created Rolfing or structural integration and said, "The issues are in the tissues." And around the spine — the spine is us, as you know. It's like you can take an arm off, a limb, but there is no brain alone, this cerebral thing alone. The spine and the other parts of the nervous system inside the torso are important. So that's why I like to start from that core entity. And then these little fluctuations they create, they unblock things, they start to move things. And you can avoid — funny enough — mobilizing those areas by doing big frame motions, and competitive motions, and techniques all your life.

Even most yogis, for example, they look extremely mobile, but then when you're actually going into the small — what I call the small frame, I borrowed this from Chinese martial arts — small frame, big frame. The big frame is these big changes of our total body in space, posture. And the small frame is barely moving, but mobilizing the little bits that comprise the same pretty much posture. So these are very beneficial and it has totally disappeared from our physical culture. When you introduce it back, the small frame offers the big frame, but the big frame doesn't offer the small frame. Because of course the small details come together into the big picture.

What will sit there in this stagnation? Emotion, material, thoughts, traumas. That's why people get discharges. The body memory is not what we think it is — it is stored in a lot everywhere, and I've had those experiences. A lot of people have the opposite: when a certain emotion is evoked, they start to undulate the spine. So this can be worked from either direction. And I believe by applying such a practice, you basically turn over the lens and you are allowing things to shift, and to move, and to adapt.

So I highly recommend it, and we teach it in a very elaborate and gradual way. I've been using — again, this slice and dice-like teaching — dozens of systems of moving the torso until a person is freed to really move the torso. The language is created, the small enough units are created in your understanding from all these systems, and then you improvise — you reach the highest level of the practice.

**Andrew Huberman:** Let me tell you a bit of why I asked. So there's a principle in neuroscience, especially in neuroevolution — evo-devo, evolution and development. We have motor neurons that live in our spinal cord that cause transmission and contraction of the muscles, allows us to move our limbs. And then we have motor neurons up here called upper motor neurons that control the lower ones. Once something is reflexive or learned, we're not thinking about it — we mainly use the lower motor neurons. We know this because you can do an experiment called creating a decerebrate cat. You remove the neocortex and these cats will walk on a treadmill — it's called fictive motion — no problem at all.

The motor neurons that control the spinal waves, as you called them, are of a particular category. They have a molecular signature, a physiological signature — they were identified by a biologist at Columbia University named Tom Jessell. Here's what's interesting: in fish or animals that really only have the opportunity to undulate and flap their little fins, the motor neurons that control undulation in those animals are identical molecularly to the motor neurons that control spinal undulation in humans. What's been added in human evolution are extra rows, literally categories, of molecularly distinct neurons so that as you move from the center of the body outward, unlike a fish, we have special motor neurons to move these little bits, these digits.

And so the reason I asked you why spinal waves create one category of movement is that if you touch a fish on one side of its body, it moves to the opposite side, it never moves toward it. But earlier we were doing a practice somewhat similar — sometimes I or someone will move toward a touch, we don't deviate to the opposite side. So I have this untested hypothesis that movements of small digits and portions of our distal body parts evoke different, maybe even more subtle sensations than movements of the core of our body and the stuff closer to the spine.

**Ido Portal:** The central orientation is mostly gone from our culture — we don't even walk basically these days. If you look at traditional culture, the amount of walking you do on a rest day is huge. And so we started to create technologies to bring everything into the periphery, controlling it with the fingertips. So we have incredible neurological development relating to this, but our central patterns — swimming, running, jumping, throwing — throwing is not pushing away, that's an example. Some people when you give them a ball to throw, you can tell if they've never thrown a ball before.

One thing I wanted to ask you is: some of these ancient patterns and systems are primary in many ways. Hence those newer developments inside of us are constrained by using the connections running through these ancient systems. Hence we are much more limited by the gene pool. We are hitchhikers on a piece of DNA, I like to say, and that gene pool is driving something so primary that even when you are in kind of the driver's seat in your eyes, you're actually not — or you're being totally constrained by that.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah, recently we had a guest on the podcast...

## [01:12:39] Song, Dance & Complex Language, Movement as Language, Consilience

**Andrew Huberman:** ...named Erich Jarvis, he's a professor at Rockefeller, who was offered a position to dance with the Alvin Ailey dance company. So an accomplished dancer and comes from a musical family — chose to become a neuroscientist instead and study speech and language. He said something incredible: when you look at the species in the kingdom of animals, including us, that have elaborate language and true song, they all also have the capacity to dance. All of them. Hummingbirds actually have a dance and a song capacity. And the going idea now in neuroscience and evolution of the brain is that singing actually came before finally articulated speech and language, that voice evolved first to sing, to communicate. Where you have song, you have dance and the capacity to dance, which of course is movement of the body. And where you have song and dance, you always find that those species can generate elaborate language.

The other piece is that Jarvis told me that when we read, if one records the EMG — the low level muscular activity in the larynx and pharynx — we are actually repeating the words that we read, but so subtly so that we don't actually speak them out, unless there's some neurologic deficit. But what that tells me is that language is movement and movement is language. So how do you think of movement as either the foundation of language or as its own language that perhaps even defies words?

**Ido Portal:** Wow, those are beautiful perspectives, and I definitely feel the same. There's a lot to say about singing and dancing as a form of ancient programs of transmission. Sometimes in some ancient practices, the mantras — people don't realize that they are tantric practices, they contain a form of vibrating and breathing all tied together into a very elaborate way to promote a certain effect. And how would you do something like this in ancient times? This is ingenious. We, even until today, need a full book to describe something and it wouldn't work as well. The more accurate we became with the language, the more dead it became, because it is less of a movement entity, it is less of a dynamic entity from its nature. And that's why Yukio Mishima says, "It's corrupting, it corrupts us."

So definitely the primary force for me is movement that is experienced. Every time we talk about movement, basically, even now we are spilling it into a container to call it what it is, but it is beyond that. Then it is applied into dancing, into singing, into language. There is no other language that I see as a primary mode — and this is the nature of space, time, things moving. Things get corrupted again, overused, abused, and then we need a new word. I start to see the end of this word for me. That's even only needed for communication and for specific processes of education exchange. It's important to stay within the experiences.

**Andrew Huberman:** Edward Wilson, the great sociobiologist — he had this beautiful word and indeed named a book with it: consilience. This idea of a leaping together of divergent forms of knowledge to create a truly valuable concept, which I love. Even in the field of medicine, you have double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trials and then you have case studies, n-of-1. H.M., the most famous example in neuroscience of a patient that had no hippocampus, informed us more about the process of memory and indeed the function of the hippocampus than thousands of independent experiments that followed. So you can't have one, you need all these different forms of exploration. And yet, the challenge, again, is that if we don't have a language for it, it becomes hard to transmit.

## [01:21:39] Movement Culture, Community, Collective Knowledge, Wild & Wise

**Andrew Huberman:** One of the things that I find incredibly sticky is this notion of movement culture. This idea of engaging in movement practice with others — whether or not it's dance or other movement practices — because it's so dynamic, there's the unpredictability of it. I've heard you say that gathering around movement is an age-old tradition, and that perhaps we'd be better off not thinking about it as "people I exercise with" but that friendship and connection made through movement is perhaps the most valuable form of connection.

**Ido Portal:** Yeah, I think it's a product of those practices that are maybe not so aware or not so movement-oriented in the open sense. And alone, we do nothing — so much so that we're never alone also on the inside, and we will manufacture and produce entities inside, so we're constantly in a dynamic exchange, cultural exchange. And practically, I learned this lesson in capoeira — it's a cultural manifestation. Things happen within this context, we rub against reality, we rub against each other and their movement occurs and insight is to be gained and development happens.

Then comes other thoughts: collective knowledge versus self-knowledge. If we go on top of some mountain, 20 people, 20 normal individuals, and we spent 20 years just fighting four hours in the morning and four hours in the afternoon for 20 years, but we're isolated from any other source of knowledge — we would still not reach anything that a very young fighter these days has. We will be unable to develop those techniques, those insights. That's where collective knowledge comes in and transmission jumps us forward. But what is the problem with that? Staying within just those technical constraints and never making it yours — that's the part of self-knowledge. The digestion of this collective information until it becomes digested and becomes part of yourselves. And then you are it versus you are doing it.

Another thought is also the Greek concepts of poiesis and physis. The growing of the seed into the tree, and the other process of the manufacturing of the chair from the tree. Two processes of development and evolution, very different. One is accumulation based, one is subtraction based.

## [01:26:36] Potential for Movement, "Humming"

**Ido Portal:** What is the ultimate for us? Should we manufacture our chair or should we grow like into the tree? Civilize the mind, leave savage the body. Is it in this way, or should the mind also be left wild? Wild and wise is a nice combination of words that I like to place together — wild, wise. So this is something that I try to bring into the way that I live my life and my practice. I try to bring the information, and the wisdom, and the collective knowledge, but I also try to let go of more and more until an essence is gleaned, until something is appearing. Because everything was already there.

For example, if I'm sitting here, all the movements are already occurring, all the possibilities are. So it's just about opening — I open this window, the air would come. I don't need to drive my motion, I need to discover what is stopping it from happening. Something is constantly holding, and when we remove this, immediately movement appears. This is real deep movement versus the driven movement that is very wasteful of times — like walking, you see people pushing through the walk instead of the controlled falling that it should be. The way to control it is to let go of the control.

A lot of people like to romanticize on that and say you don't need teachers, we don't need nothing, we don't need information. It's not fully honest — depends on where you want to function and how you want to function. They shouldn't be demonized, but they shouldn't be overly glorified as well.

**Andrew Huberman:** You mentioned about the opportunity for movement — perhaps even all forms of movement coming from deep within. That raises to mind in the neuroscience of motor systems what we talk about as pre-motor neurons — the ones that evoke contraction of muscles. There's this category of neurons that isn't often discussed: the pre-motor system. Most of our movements are the reflection of certain patterns of transmission breaking through from the pre-motor to the actual motor. In other words, we are always in an anticipatory mode of movement. Think of it as a layer of neurons that's constantly humming, ready to go. And it's the release of these gates that allows movement to occur in a particular way.

**Ido Portal:** Which is DNA, the same — turning off and on, all the information is already there. And then the possibilities are just allowed. So I am allowed — I don't do free will already, but I am allowed to do. I am. There are possibilities and I am dancing within that dance, but I am not the only dancer. So that's my sensation at least with most states of being. To wake up in the morning and feel that living thing is the feeling of movement, and for me it's a result of the practice. And so then it's easy not to stagnate, and then the mind can stay focused for hours. Which is very difficult — I haven't had a good conversation in the US, it's very difficult. And I've had your attention and you're listening, but it's rare. It's rare that somebody can do that. And it's definitely my trick, my dirty trick.

## [01:32:18] Instructiveness vs Permissiveness, Degrees of Freedom

**Andrew Huberman:** In the principles of neuroscience, we talk about instructiveness versus permissiveness. There are instructive cues — the ability to pick up this pen, clearly there's a motor command. But the way it actually works is that there's a pre-motor system that's already generating that movement, and what we've done is we've flung open the gate and allowed that movement to occur precisely.

**Ido Portal:** Surfing it. Surfing that current, or this current, or another current, or opening the window.

**Andrew Huberman:** Exactly. And if you look at the formal study of movement and improvement of movement, the most basic example I can give is like a tennis serve. You map the trajectories, and in a novice the lines are all over the place — it ends up looking more like a tangle of rubber band ball. Whereas in a Federer or the expert, you almost wonder if it's just one line being drawn, but the trajectories are incredibly stereotyped. That's the reflection of one little narrow gate opening again, and again, and again.

**Ido Portal:** Let me inject something here from an old neurologist, you can say — Bernstein, the Soviet. He talked about degrees of freedom, and they did some work in order to increase productivity in Soviet Union. He was brought in to examine the movement habits of the workers, and he placed these dots and took photos — he was one of the first doing kinetic capturing of motion with moving pictures. And what he discovered was something very interesting: the accuracy of the heat of the sledgehammer increased while the variants in the various points became more, not less. So it wasn't a fixed pattern, it was a meta pattern. This pattern is adjusted to achieve the perfect execution. Those were very early findings. Basically, the self-adjusting dynamic nature of the system allows you to reach a very constant and stable end result by being so open and letting go of your control.

**Andrew Huberman:** The example you give fits very well with the one that I described before. There's a paper — we'll put it in the show notes — a guy also happens to be at Harvard named Bence Ölveczky, a Hungarian. And the trajectory that was mapped was the movement of the tennis racket, not of the limbs themselves in the Federer case. So that I think aligns well with what you're describing. That exploration of degrees of freedom...

## [01:35:50] Variety, Diversity & Virtuosity

**Andrew Huberman:** ...is where the opportunity for real advancement and expansion of skill shows up. We go from unskilled to skilled, and then there's mastery, and then there's this top tier — virtuosity — in which the practitioner invites variability and chance back in as an opportunity to do truly new things.

**Ido Portal:** It made me think many years ago — so what is that entity? Because obviously it's not technique, and it wouldn't even be honest to say it's a movement pattern, there is too much diversity there. I started to talk about what I called movement sleeves or meta technique — but the word technique is already misleading. There is some kind of a dynamic sleeve in which you can move as long as you are not out of this sleeve, you are still within the boundaries of achieving the result that you're after. And the result is adaptation of all these elements inside to keep you in the sleeve. The sleeve is not constricted as we once thought. There are many ways to skin a cat, and that experience, and that variety, that diversity goes into virtuosity. It's true freedom because your focus is on the right thing. You don't point at the moon and look at your finger — and that's really in essence being a virtuoso.

**Andrew Huberman:** Oh, there is such a thing as mastery. And I'll flatter and attempt to embarrass you by saying I'm not alone in viewing you as a virtuoso of movement. This notion that not everything is pre-planned, that even you might not know what you're going to do next until the moment of execution. I'd like to talk about mindsets in approaching practice...

## [01:38:06] Vision & Movement, Focus & Awareness, Panoramic Awareness

**Andrew Huberman:** ...but I want to wade into that territory by talking about vision and the eyes, something that we both share a deep interest in. I from the background of visual neuroscience, but also from the realization that we have this incredible ability to adjust the aperture of our visual window — we can focus very narrowly and we can focus very broadly. When you begin a practice and as you move through a practice, do you apply a regimented way of focusing your vision? And for the person who's a true beginner like myself, how should I show up to the practice with my eyes?

**Ido Portal:** The eyes are a good starting point as you help a lot of people to understand. And when you encounter difficulties with other layers, it's very powerful to start with the eyes. Another thing important to understand and to experience — we do not move the eyes as well as we think we do. As long as you can see and move the eyes, people never think about it, that it can be trained, that it can be improved, and the effects of it are far reaching.

The eyes lead to the inner eye, you can think of it in a beautiful metaphorical way. And it's a representation of the way that we use various cognitive and mind processes. The eyes lead in many ways and the head is also very powerful because all of these inputs are coming in here. So it's very easy to lead the body from the head — if I pull your head now to the side, you will immediately start to organize your feet under you. So I give you just one element to manipulate the system from.

Many animals hunt with the head — you can see the body running forward while the head is turning to the side, the whole thing follows afterwards. So it's a very powerful way to address movement, not the only one, but definitely a primary one. And then the use of the eyes is of course maybe the most important element. How do you come in? Well, it depends on the practice. You need to start to have some kind of a checklist of what you're looking to do. And then by this, you can start to tailor the way that you use your eyes.

There are different flavors, there is no correct way to use the eyes. Sometimes it's very peripheral, soft, open awareness orientation; sometimes it's very focused. Notice that I'm pulling these two opposites — awareness and focus — which are often put together and fused. The eyes are the immediate and the easiest entry point into that. Another thing is the placement of the head and the eyes. When we lower our chin, we seem to see better. When we raise the eyebrows, there is too much exposure of top light sources. And in many scenarios, tilting of the chin to the side, or placing a certain eye or dominant eye, depending on various scenarios.

**Andrew Huberman:** Yeah, I love that you mentioned chin down because we all have a natural reflex — when chin goes down, eyes go up, and the opposite is true when head goes up, eyes go down. And there are two separate clusters of neurons in the cranial nerve nuclei: when eyes are up, it increases our level of alertness overall. This is not woo science — this is the function of these cranial nerve nuclei. When our eyes are down, we go into states of more calm and quiescence. And this makes perfect sense — then the eyelids usually go down and people fall asleep. Eyes up does not mean head up.

And then, as you mentioned, this difference between focus and awareness. When we are in this more panoramic, soft gaze and broad awareness — big swaths of visual field — the neurons that control that come through a pathway called the magnocellular pathway. Those neurons are much thicker, they transmit much faster, just like thick pipes can carry more water more quickly. And your reaction time is at least four times what it is in this awareness mode than it is when you're narrowly focused on something. The person who is running to catch the ball is not tracking the ball in a smooth movement — most of their vision is in peripheral vision. When we drive we're in this peripheral vision and our reaction times are much, much faster.

So I think what you and I agree on, correct me if I'm wrong, is that exploring these different extremes and everything in between is where the real value is.

**Ido Portal:** Another pragmatic bit — since our culture has been more geared and pushing us towards focus, the focused use of the eyes, and primary language, reading, and other things, we have less opportunities to work with the more open panoramic one. So it would be smart to start to balance things out a bit more. When you're in nature, you don't look at each leaf — everything is moving and you are kind of immersed in that. And then, something attracts your attention, "Oh, it's a bird," and you focus, and you go back into the general state — the base state, which is open awareness. Here, we switch things around in our modern culture. We are mostly focused, and then we sometimes daydream, which is maybe some kind of a balancing act that comes from deep within. I see that many times people need to — the focus is overly done by far in our lives.

**Andrew Huberman:** I couldn't agree more, and I think a lot of the visual deficits that we now see in young people — myopia, literally nearsightedness — occurs because if we look at things that are too close to us as children or as adults, the eyeball actually gets longer. The lens focuses the visual image nearer to the lens — nearsighted — than in front of where it should land. And basically, it's a lack of panoramic vision that is driving these changes. And nowadays, most people are 90% of the time in this narrow focus mode. Right before recording, we took a break and went up to look at a vista and to look off to the distance — incredibly useful, easy practice, but I think most people are not doing this sort of thing. And the way that it shapes the mind and the perception of time, of course, is a whole other kingdom of ideas.

## [01:48:28] Hearing & Movement

**Andrew Huberman:** I'd like to relate this element of vision and open awareness to something you mentioned earlier — the cone of auditory attention. Do you see any value to both paying attention to things in a very narrow cone of auditory attention, but also just walking and listening to all the sounds at once? And in terms of physical movement practices, where is your hearing when you approach your practice?

**Ido Portal:** Another set of parameters to think about, and to play with, and to be aware of. Also, I have the experience that some people are better at using this system or that system. And you would be amazed how differently the same seemingly outside results are done by different practitioners in different scenarios. This goes into this mutation and change idea — what really jumps us forward eventually is some kind of a mutation. So it's like all of our culture, and practices, and success puts us closer and closer to each other — so we have the same opinions everywhere around the world, becoming more and more the same, less and less different. But the real hope comes from the different, and we have a difficulty in promoting that.

And so this is another thing that can be promoted with the right practices. For example, I work with corporates or even worked with governments before to bring in some of that freshness with simple habits in the workday, or in the education of children, or in companies. I don't really give a fuck about the productivity — I am there to give what I view is important. And what is important maybe increases productivity, but it's more important to me that it improves people's lives who are involved. Being and becoming — these two entities. I'm not there, I'm on my way, I'm a process.

Thinking about hearing — the way that people use their ears, the way that people use listening. Again, placement of the head and posture, sometimes angling as well, sharper angle, chin down. Some people tend to use the shape of the ear. Even the shape of our face — the development of the vocal chords and speaking will totally change how we look, but how we listen also will do the same. I don't have any proof of it, but it is something I believe in.

**Andrew Huberman:** People will even make their ears bigger — we try to become like little fennec foxes by cupping our ears. A lot of people don't realize that's actually why we do this — to capture more sound waves. The localization of sound is based on a simple brainstem calculation of interaural time differences — the time in which something arrives first to this ear versus that ear. The brain intuitively just knows that if a sound arrives first to this ear, it's likely coming from over here. It's an incredibly simple calculation when one hears it — no pun intended — but it's an incredibly valuable way of thinking about how the architecture of the body changes our experience.

## [01:52:43] Walking Gaits

**Andrew Huberman:** Along those lines, you mentioned something earlier about walking that flagged an important question. When I see people walking sometimes I think, "Wow, they really move in a strange way." Occasionally you see somebody walk in a really impressive way. Do you think that if people have a body type that facilitates certain kinds of movement and not others, they should intentionally try and move in the way that is right at the edge of friction and challenge in order to shape new possibilities? Or should they lean into the smooth execution of what comes most naturally to them?

**Ido Portal:** Yeah, I think a good practice is to have many walks because they're required. Of course there is a very efficient and endurance, stamina-oriented thing that if you have the experience, it will naturally develop and unravel. And if not, you can get some collective knowledge and improve. And then there is a lot of emotion — emotional things related to walk. Like how I'm walking into a business meeting, or how I'm walking out of a bad situation. There is a lot of beautiful things to research there practically with yourself. Trying to approach someone with the chin slightly down, very linear, very efficient in the straightest line. Or trying to approach someone a little bit more rounded from the side and tilting your head — and you will see totally different results, totally different communication that happens. If you're sensitive, you realize, "Wow, this opened the door." Instead, many people start on the minus. You can start even on the plus if you are the sly man, as the practitioner needs to be.

And then you have body proportions and ways — we have all these technical invasions. Mathematics, and trigonometry, and architecture invaded our bodies, they invaded our nervous system. And now our walk and our physical practices, they look linear and efficient — the path between two points is a straight line. But it's not. This is biomechanics, not mechanics. Nothing there is a given, there's no gospel. So the walkers sometimes have to go around or sway from side to side, and there is coiling — and there are moving bits. What about the coordination of my breathing with my walk? Because if I walk too linearly, there is less pumping of the air naturally in and out, so now I have to forcefully bring it in and out — I'm wasteful.

And that's why you see in last years these incredible runners, especially in long distance, doing things we never thought were possible in the worst possible way that we used to think — pronation and all kinds of things. Our technical thoughts were totally misguided and wrong. And then somebody comes in and does it in some way that is totally wrong and he gets results we could never get. And that's the beauty of playfulness, experimentation, change, being different.

## [01:56:55] Playful Variability & Evolution, Improvisation & Openness

**Andrew Huberman:** As you're describing this I'm smiling because one of my favorite neuroscientists, he's out of the University of Chicago, was in a meeting and there was an argument about evolution of the nervous system. And he said very, very appropriately that "One of the major jobs of evolution is to take existing cell types and circuits and give them new functions. But that can only be done through the playful exploration of new possibilities." Which I think maps very well to what you're saying — that at the extreme thresholds of technical execution, you know, mastery, mastery, mastery, your performance is very high, but the opportunity for evolution of the sport, or the music, or the dance, or the intellectual endeavor is limited because you're not introducing variability.

**Ido Portal:** Hence, I want to offer something relating to you. We should be wary of defining the mechanisms and putting certain meaning with certain processes and ways because just history and experience shows it doesn't work well for us most times. Like for example, your advice about heat, dopamine, light offers a lot of benefit, but also can create problems and it can enclose something which the improviser will find. The MacGyvers, right? Like take a paper clip and you make it into something great.

You know, the Russian-American space exploration story with the space pen — famous story about the development of the space pen. There was this, of course, a space competition and the Americans developed the space pen with a huge investment because of lack of gravity out there. The Russians used a pencil. I don't know if it's true, I don't think it is, but it represents something in the state of mind. Like you look at, for example, the military equipment in Soviet equipment — it all can do multiple things, which means it's heavier, it's less efficient, it's not as light. But even the Navy SEALs will still carry an AK with certain conditions. Why? Because you can pour a whole bucket of sand into the mechanism and it will keep running. While the most advanced German Heckler & Koch — for every grain it can get stuck and overly specialized.

There is something about this openness that we humans need to keep. And also maybe something for our leaders — to be less specialists and more in this openness. Less capable in this or that way, but more capable of doing the whole thing.

**Andrew Huberman:** I love the story, whether or not it's a legend or not, it's legendary because it's fantastic. As you say, in the laboratory, whenever someone takes on a project in my lab, I always say, "You know, you have to ask yourself how much technical detail and challenge you want to take on because with more advanced technology, yes, there's the opportunity for more discovery, but more downtime." There's a dynamic interplay there.

**Ido Portal:** By the way, I think that scientists get it right. It's where you transmit the knowledge out of the scientific field — because science has debate and everything — you're not so connected. Of course this can happen as well, but then when it goes out and the simple person without the experience takes it more as a gospel, as a fixed thing. But it was just a report. It was just reporting some functions here — play with it, see what it does for you. Because with all the greatest information that I can give, the person will examine it and it might not be useful at all for him. This is the practitioner — make it your own, go practice, try heat, cold, light, movement, awareness to this, awareness to this. And this is up to you to make it yours, but we don't like to have this responsibility.

**Andrew Huberman:** No, people prefer to have "this will work the first time every time and will serve you best compared to everything else." While there are more reliable tools than others, in my mind, the more reliable tools tend to be ones that are grounded in our innate physiology. Biology has some very good solutions, but they don't always work — not every time.

## [02:03:05] Reactivity & Personal Space, Touch & Proximity to Others, Play & Discomfort

**Andrew Huberman:** Earlier today, we did a practice which involved an invasion, shall we say, of peripersonal space. We weren't standing super close for any particular reason, but we were close enough together we could touch torsos and we were doing that as part of this practice. And you encouraged me to pay attention to how does it feel to have someone in your peripersonal space, and then this notion of reactivity. I find this an immensely interesting and potentially powerful practice because I think a lot of people suffer from anxiety just being in a face-to-face conversation. Some people have a lot of anxiety about being physically close to people. And many people are reactive — they are in that anticipatory state of something that is going to happen. Maybe you could talk about that a little bit more.

**Ido Portal:** Yeah. Touch, proximity — all these things take a very limited place in our lives. People are not touched and they don't touch enough. There are certain bubbles of peripersonal space according to culture, according to environment. And then came all the political correctness and harassments and all kinds. And this is a problem — it's a problem to navigate all this scenario.

People go to BJJ classes to touch, not to learn BJJ. Most of them, they're not even aware of it. Children who are not touched — there is a lot of information about that and the problems. But adults who are not touched, there is not a lot of information. And I think it's no less of a problem because it's something that has to be constantly present.

And then proximity — being able to remove certain reactivity and to learn to control that volume control over how reactive I am. In other scenarios, how do I remove this reactivity altogether? This is very important for performance and also for our lives, for clear thinking, because everything is moving through us and being monitored by us — so everything has the potential to detract us from a certain direction of exploration. If you're reactive, you're a slave, and it becomes worse and worse and worse. A fighter or a football player has to know what to take, what not to take. The fact that you can sense more doesn't mean you should react to it.

The practice helps that by bringing people into these scenarios, but oftentimes disarming them. Like when we were working closely today — and because you have a certain background with boxing or fighting, I can tell you are missing some kind of a way to be in that space that is not marshaled. So you carry a certain tone. Although you're a very kind person, but oftentimes you held me without realizing you're holding me with a lot of strength, and it was just clear to me you're not fully aware of what is unfolding. It's just, of course, a question of experience. So to be able to be in this scenario, but do something else — which is not geared towards winning, losing, competition, or just being able to play with another person.

Like for example, contact improvisation took that and played with it — the work of Steve Paxton for the ones who are not familiar. When you are practicing in this open way, you are not bound by specific rule set or ways of doing things. It can be a fight, but it can be a dance a moment after. Another thing I learned from capoeira — the situation is very tricky there. I've seen kids doing cartwheels in Brazil and scissors fall from their pocket. Why? Because there are certain intentions. And at other times you see back flips and beautiful things, but people die in capoeira every year. I've explored other martial arts and boxing, I was involved with MMA and BJJ, but I tell you the most violent arena is that vibe because it's unknown. One moment, it smiles; another moment, it's something else. There are no categories, no weights, and it's a street phenomenon.

So it's very important to explore many ways of being within different distances and spaces from other people, touched in different ways, and not contextualizing it always in the same way. I can touch your chest in one way, I can touch it with the exact same pressure and speed, but it will feel very different. The parameters — I'm not sure, certain intentions, certain combination of postures or ways. And this is beautiful exploration.

And again, I would encourage you and others to explore the discomfort. For example, certain discomfort to be with a man in a certain scenario, or with a woman — trying to see what is that? Because if we're truly strong, we are not afraid of anything. If we truly know who we are and we are in that exploration, we don't know the end result, but we are in a research. And then we are not afraid of being in debt or in this, and we don't come out of boundaries. This will improve our culture tremendously. Of course, there must be agreement, you never force yourself, but you meet someone who is also interested in that exploration and then you do it.

There are many scenarios to do that with traditional practices — like learning to grapple, or going to contact improvisation, or going to Latin dance class. And of course my favorite is to create and to come up with your own hybrids of that and scenarios. Communicating with your loved one through movement, not sitting around food and talking — moving together in all kinds of ways. Sometimes it's walking together, but sometimes it's all kinds of things, it can be game, playful, it can be romantic. And there are many shades — sex doesn't start here and end here, it's like a continuum. And with time, I think it unlocks a lot of things. People become much stronger in a good sense, in sense of becoming, being, and we abuse less.

**Andrew Huberman:** I love the idea that through the exploration of a range of physical contacts, provided one knows they can always return to their center, there's a lot of opportunity that opens up. I wish there was more of that encouraged in children's play, but also in adult environments. In the states, many institutions you're not allowed to touch anyone else's body.

There's a wonderful study that comes to mind from an Israeli laboratory, a guy named Noam Sobel, who has shown that by recording people's first interactions — when people meet, if they shake hands, they almost always, greater than 85% of the time, wipe the chemicals from the other person onto their own eyes or face. This is thought to be a carryover from what other animals do in terms of exchanging microbiome elements, exchanging chemicals that we're constantly feeding our subconscious with the chemical knowledge of the chemical constituents of other people. More touch seems to me, provided it's consensual, just a really good thing overall.

**Ido Portal:** And I think maybe also important for discharging, discharging certain experiences, remodeling, reframing. So touches is very powerful in that. If you're touched and you're touching a lot, you're unpacking and you experience that touch that maybe has been traumatic and you're reframing it. You have the opportunity. I've heard some story about some traditional culture in which when you were burned by mistake, they would immediately burn you again. And it made me think — maybe it allows a certain completion to happen that in the traumatic moment is not there. So the re-exposure, while you're still open, allows you to reframe the experience and then the unfolding of the rest of the event is very different.

**Andrew Huberman:** I'm glad you mentioned running scenarios in your head. My colleague at Stanford, David Spiegel, he works on trauma and he has voiced that he's against things like trigger warnings because of the way that it puts the nervous system into this state of readiness and reactivity that can exacerbate problems. Whereas it's very clear from the literature on trauma and trauma relief that the way to deal with that is through a controlled re-exposure to the trauma in order to diminish the emotional response over time. If one avoids the thing that makes them upset over and over, all it does is serve to create a heightened state of readiness — it primes more trauma.

**Ido Portal:** Yeah. I think impressions are very useful here also when stepping into an area in which trauma can occur. And then by going through the impression that it already occurred, you create some kind of a thermal layer of protection. So I've already been hit when I'm entering that space — it's so beneficial. Or I've already been touched in a way that I didn't like if I go to a contact improvisation class, and just running this scenario in your head protects so well, yeah.

## [02:18:13] Visualization & Experience, Feedback

**Andrew Huberman:** I've been curious all day as to whether or not you do visualization or mental rehearsal of physical movement. Can you just imagine a movement and learn it better than were you to actually perform it?

**Ido Portal:** Yeah, the word visualization's not good, obviously — it has to be experientialization in a very complete way, not just visually of course. And unless you already developed certain experience, tangible experience that has benefited from feedback, from outside feedback, it is not a very useful thing to do, and it ends up being fabrications. But if you are very experienced and you already gained the benefit of being burned here or overextended here, then you have a certain experience and then you can strengthen certain aspects of it. But you got to be careful because you do not have feedback. And because of the missing feedback, you might develop delusions. It might be that you develop stronger patterning, but ultimately this would lead you away from the aliveness of the movement itself. Drilling, for example — very useful to learn a general infrastructure of the movement sleeve or the technique. But then to dress it up, you need feedback, you need it to be alive, you need to receive something corrective.

## [02:20:14] Linear Movement & Movement Investigation, Examination

**Andrew Huberman:** For many people, they approach movement in the form of weight training, or yoga, or running. I think most people will probably not depart from those practices entirely because they like them. I'm speaking about myself. But in terms of adding a movement practice to one's already existing exercise regime, one thing that I have started doing on the basis of some of your teachings is rather than statically standing there and lifting weights, actually walking between repetitions. It occurred to me that I'd never done a curl, a bicep curl, with one foot in front of the other — and then I'd never actually switched that up. It's kind of an odd stance to be standing in parallel and curling one's arm. So what are your thoughts about these very linear forms of exercise? And do you encourage people to expand the play space for these kinds of exercise?

**Ido Portal:** Hmm, it's definitely a problem, and it's approachable. People want a quick hack, they want the icing — there is no cake. There is no cake, and it's just like industries of icing, icing, icing on what? So for me that's why I'm going towards this side. It's like: I have my life, now tell me what movement practices I should pursue. You are movement, in essence — you are not thinking of yourself in any serious way through my eyes. There is a dynamic entity to you, the body is a huge part of it communicating. You have genetic layers, there are personalities that got developed and built around various influences, but then there is also some kind of an essence, something that reeks from within the cells. And if you grew up in my family and I grew up in your family and it would still be the same — and that's something I always try to think about. What is that inside of me?

So I think these practices, they're very good, but they're not designed for the goal that we think they were designed to do. They orient towards something else. For example, yoga — there is a good book called "Yoga Body" which will destroy a lot of people's yoga practice. It goes into how did we get to this yoga — the influence of Swedish gymnastics and Mongolian contortionists, and the Western influence affecting it. And then the ancient practice, which was barely asana-related, posture, position.

So actually you said yoga is less linear — yoga is very linear, very linear these days. Look at all the traditional dances, they look like nothing like yoga. Look at Thai dance, look at Chinese dances and martial arts — it's all rounded, it's all curved, like out of nature, what you see in the movement of the animals. So where does it come from? These are things to understand because it designs you now, it shapes you.

**Andrew Huberman:** I don't want to have the same practice — I don't want to. I've curled already in this way, I want to experience something else.

**Ido Portal:** What you described is not about you placing the foot in front when you're curling — it's about the examination. This is why it is a very good direction. And then you will need another one, another one — don't get stuck on that foot in front of it. Try to do it with the eyes closed, or with a different head posture, and you will see things arrive, unrelated things. The associative mind, this thinking, this relates — it doesn't get to the heart of it, never. So just infusing these elements like in a cup will create endless combinations, possibilities, and a lot of discovery.

And this for me is humility of the practitioner. I don't know. I try — like today with you, I tried various combinations and, oh, I discover something, oh there is — this is a playful approach, and this is a researcher approach. I don't try to fit my truth into something. I'm there to examine. I don't have a motive yet. Why? Because I'm fine. I don't depend on that to define myself. I'm a human being — but if I don't have that sense of worth, I'm already geared towards I need to do this, I need to prove this, I have this agenda. And this is how we get all the lies in the world and all the problems and difficulties.

These practices, they are related to prove this, that, this way. A lot of the reported outcomes are often from my place is like funny. I hear about something like I heard you say about gratitude practice — that actually experiencing gratitude from outside as somebody else, or receiving gratitude, is actually more powerful. It's true, but I see why it's true. If somebody tries to feel gratitude, just sit with the eyes closed or watch a movie and sense the gratitude there — it will be clear to you: one is very difficult to do and the other is very easy. Hence, if gratitude is achieved easier this way, that's why it works like that. Although all the traditional practices are about you, and by challenging yourself to sense that gratitude yourself, they achieve much more powerful things, but these are not the research people.

So a lot of the things that can arrive to us — weight training, the benefits, the way that the hormonal effect, the effect of cognition. When you open a bit and you go far out, you see certain things, not the truth, but maybe less delusion. There is nothing definite, but there is something maybe more wholesome that appears. So this is a state — a state of exploration.

I don't want to have the same thought if I already had it, why would I want to have the same thought? I already had it. There is a benefit to gain, but the better is better, is not more, is not faster. It's like better is better. And better — we don't know what better is. Oh, this is better. I don't know. It's just more weight, it's one more kilo. But maybe if I remove one kilo, I discover something. Like, for example, power development that has been shown to gain certain benefits when you lighten the load and you accelerate more in certain conditions — but who discovered it? A practitioner. The math people reported something, but it was already within the grasp of the practitioners.

And those plays that you're doing, people give you the weird looks — I tell people, "You don't want to be normal. If you don't get the weird looks, you're not moving in the right direction." You're moving in a very fixed direction and you already know the result of that direction, let's say at least that. So continue to play with that, continue to play. Look elsewhere, look at places you didn't look at. What happens when you do it with a smile, the same workout, and when you do it with a frown? Or what happens with breath holding or blood restrictions? All this is great play and I think very beneficial to go through.

**Andrew Huberman:** Love it. I think that's a wonderful message. And what I keep hearing from you over and over again is that people should explore, explore, explore. And listen, I want to thank you for your time today — first of all for the incredible teachings here at this table, but also the introduction to a movement practice. Although now I'm tempted to say that I've been moving my whole life, I just didn't know it was such a vast landscape. Also that your willingness to tread out in this journey that is truly unique. The greatest compliment that one can give in science is the one that I'm going to tell you now: we say you're an n-of-1. And you truly are — I don't think there's anyone that has been as willing to embrace existing practices, evolve them, create new practices, and to share so broadly and really be willing to give and teach so much knowledge. You mentioned your goals of in part being wild and wise — and I'm here to tell you that you are both wild and wise. And so thank you so much.

**Ido Portal:** Thank you very much, thank you.

## [02:31:45] Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

**Andrew Huberman:** Thank you for joining me today for my discussion about the science and practice of movement and movement culture with Ido Portal. If you'd like to learn more about Ido and his workshops and other aspects of what he does, please go to his social media. His Instagram handle is Portal.Ido, and you can also go to idoportal.com.

If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel — that's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. As well, please subscribe to our podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. On Apple, you can also leave us comments and feedback. If you have suggestions about topics or podcast guests, or if you have criticism or questions, please put those in the comment section on YouTube.

Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast — that's the best way to support this podcast. On many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements. The Huberman Lab Podcast has decided to partner with Momentous — they are the absolute highest quality, ship anywhere in the world, and we wanted to have one site where people could find the supplements discussed on this podcast. Please go to livemomentous.com/huberman.

If you're not already following us on social media, we are at hubermanlab on both Instagram and Twitter. We also have a completely zero-cost newsletter — you can find it by going to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu and go to newsletter. We have newsletters about a toolkit for sleep, for instance, or a neuroplasticity super protocol. Again, that's hubermanlab.com. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.
