---
title: "The Science & Treatment of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD)"
type: transcript
episode_date: 2022-06-27
episode_number: 78
speakers:
  - Andrew Huberman
youtube_id: OadokY8fcAA
search:
  exclude: true
---

## [00:00:00] Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD)

Welcome to The Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are talking about obsessive-compulsive disorder or OCD. We are also going to talk about obsessive-compulsive personality disorder which, as you will soon learn, is distinct from obsessive-compulsive disorder. In fact, many people that refer to themselves or others as obsessive or compulsive or quote-unquote, having OCD or OCD about this or OCD about that do not have clinically diagnosable OCD, rather, many people have obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.

However, there are many people in the world that have actual OCD, and for those people, there's a tremendous amount of suffering. In fact, OCD turns out to be number seven on the list of most debilitating illnesses, not just psychiatric illnesses, but of all illnesses, which is remarkable and somewhat frightening. The good news is thanks to the fields of psychiatry, psychology, and science in general, there are now excellent treatments for OCD. We're going to talk about those treatments today. Those treatments range from behavioral therapies, to drug therapies, and brain stimulation, and even some of the more holistic or natural therapies.

As you'll soon learn, for certain people, they may want to focus more on the behavioral therapies, whereas for others, more on the drug-based therapies and so on and so forth. One extremely interesting and important thing I learned from this episode is that the particular sequence that behavioral and/or drug and/or holistic therapies are applied is extremely important. In fact, the outcomes of studies often depend on whether or not people start on drug treatment and then follow with cognitive behavioral treatment or vice versa. We're going to go into all those details and how they relate to different types of OCD, because it turns out there are indeed different types of obsessions and compulsions, and the age of onset for OCD, and so on and so forth.

What I can assure you is by the end of this episode, you'll have a much greater understanding of what OCD is and what it isn't, and what obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is and what it is not. And you'll have a rich array of different therapy options to explore in yourself or in others that are suffering from OCD. And if neither you nor others that you know suffer from OCD or obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the information covered in today's episode will also provide insight into how the brain and nervous system translate thought into action generally. And also, you're going to learn a lot about goal-directed behavior generally. My hope is that by the end of the episode you'll both understand a lot about this disease state that we call OCD, you will have access to information that will allow you to direct treatments to yourself or others in better ways, and that you will gain greater insight into how you function and how human beings function in general.

## [00:08:28] What is OCD and Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder?

Let's talk about OCD or obsessive-compulsive disorder. First of all, as the name suggests, OCD includes thoughts or obsessions and compulsions which are actions. The obsessions and the compulsions are often linked. In fact, most of the time, the obsessions and the compulsions are linked such that the compulsion, the behavior, is designed to relieve the obsession. However, one of the hallmark themes of obsessive-compulsive disorder is that the obsessions are intrusive. People don't want to have them. They don't enjoy having them. They just seem to pop into people's minds and they seem to pop into their mind recurrently.

And the compulsions, unlike other sorts of behaviors, provide brief relief to the obsession, but then very quickly reinforce or strengthen the obsession. This is a very key theme to realize about obsessive-compulsive disorder so I'm just going to repeat it again. These two features — first, the fact that the obsessions are intrusive and recurrent, as well as the fact that the compulsions, the behaviors, provide, if anything, only brief relief for the obsessions, but in most cases simply serve to make the obsessions stronger — are the hallmark features of obsessive-compulsive disorder.

And it turns out to be very important to keep these in mind as we go forward, not just because they define obsessive-compulsive disorder, but they also define the sorts of treatments that will and will not work for obsessive-compulsive disorder. And then once you understand a little bit about the neural circuitry underlying obsessive-compulsive disorder, which we'll talk about in a few moments, then you will clearly understand why being a quote-unquote obsessive person or having obsessive-compulsive personality is not the same as OCD.

In fact, we can leap ahead a little bit and compare and contrast OCD with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder along one very particular set of features. Again, I'll go into this in more detail later, but it's fair to say that OCD is characterized by these recurrent and intrusive obsessions. And as I mentioned before, the fact that those obsessions get stronger as a function of people performing certain behaviors. So unlike an itch that you feel, and then you scratch it and it feels better, OCD is more like an itch that you feel, you scratch it, and the itch intensifies. That contour or that pattern of behaviors and thoughts interacting is very different than obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, which mainly involves a sense of delayed gratification that people want and somewhat enjoy because it allows them to function better or more in line with how they would like to show up in the world.

So again, OCD has mainly to do with obsessions that are intrusive and recurrent, whereas obsessive-compulsive personality disorder does not have that intrusive feature to it. People do not mind, or in fact, often invite or like the particular patterns of thought that lead them to be compulsive along certain dimensions.

## [00:11:18] OCD: Major Incidence & Severity

So leaving aside obsessive-compulsive personality disorder for the moment, let's focus a bit more on OCD and define how it tends to show up in the world. First of all, OCD is extremely common. In fact, current estimates are that anywhere from 2.5% to as high as 3 or even 4% of people suffer from true OCD, that is an astonishingly high number. Now, the reason the range is so big, 2.5% all the way up to 3, or maybe even 4%, is that a lot of the features of OCD go unnoticed both in the clinician's office and simply because people don't report it and don't talk about it.

In fact, it is possible to have recurrent and intrusive obsessions and not engage in the sorts of behaviors that would ever allow people to notice that somebody has OCD. That can be because some of the intrusive thoughts don't actually lead to overt behaviors like hand washing or checking that other people would notice. It can also be because people learn to disguise or hide their obsessions and their compulsions out of shame or fear of looking strange or whatever it might be — such that they have these obsessive and intrusive thoughts, and they do little micro-behaviors like they might tap their fingers on their thigh as a way to avoid, at least in their own mind, something catastrophic happening.

Another thing to point out is that OCD is extremely debilitating. OCD is currently listed as number seven in terms of the most debilitating illnesses, not just mental illnesses or disorders, but all types of illnesses including things like asthma and cancer. So you can imagine with that standing at number seven, that it is both extremely common and extremely debilitating. As a consequence, it's now realized that many hours, days, weeks, months, or even years of work performance, relational interactions really suffer as a consequence of people having OCD.

One of the things that makes OCD so debilitating is, of course, the shame that we talked about before. But it's also the fact that when people are focusing on their obsessions and their compulsions, they're not able to focus on other things. That's simply the way that the brain works. OCD also takes a lot of time out of people's lives. With recurrent intrusive thoughts happening at very high frequency, or even at moderate frequency, people are spending a lot of time thinking about this stuff and they're thinking about the behaviors they need to engage in, and then engaging in the behaviors, which as I mentioned before, just serve to strengthen the compulsions.

Another thing you'll soon learn is that sadly, a lot of the obsessions and compulsions in OCD often relate to taboo topics.

## [00:15:10] Categories of OCD

And that's because the general categories of OCD fall into three different bins: checking obsessions and compulsions, repetition obsessions and compulsions, and order obsessions and compulsions.

The checking ones are somewhat obvious — checking the stove or checking the locks, which I think we all tend to do. I'm somebody who typically will head off to the car to commute to work and I'll think, did I lock the front door, and I'll go back once, but I won't go back twice or 50 times. People with OCD will often go back 20 or 30 times before they'll actually allow themselves to drive off. And then it's a real challenge for them to continue to drive off and discard the idea that they didn't check the stove or they didn't check the locks.

Repetition obsessions and compulsions obviously can dovetail with the checking ones, but those tend to be things like counting off of a certain number of numbers — like one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one — people perform that repeatedly, repeatedly, repeatedly, or feel that they have to. I remember years ago watching a documentary about the band The Ramones. The Ramones had one band member — Joey Ramone — who was admittedly and known to others as having OCD. In that documentary, the band members describe Joey Ramone as leaving hotels, walking down the stairs to the parking lot, but then having to walk up and down them seven or eight times, and sometimes getting out of the van again and walking up and down them seven or eight times, and it always had to be a certain number of times given a certain number of stairs.

And then there's order. Order oftentimes is thought of as putting cleanliness or making sure everything is aligned and perfect and orderly. And oftentimes that is the case, but there are other forms of order that people with OCD can focus on in an obsessive and compulsive way. Things like incompleteness — the idea that one can't walk away from something or stop doing something because something's not right or complete in that picture. It could be the way the table is set, it could be the way that something's written on a page, it could be an email.

If somebody has OCD that's in the domain of order, it could be incompleteness and the constant feeling of something not being completed and a need to complete it. It can also be in terms of symmetry, that everything be aligned and symmetric in some way. And then the other aspect of order, which is a little bit less intuitive, is this notion of disgust — this idea that something is contaminated. So we often think about OCD and hand washing behavior in response to people feeling that something is contaminated, a space, a towel, or even simply somebody else's hand, and so they're unwilling to shake somebody's hand.

You can imagine how these different bins of obsessions and compulsions — checking, repetition, and order — can be extremely debilitating depending on how severe they are and how many different domains of life they show up in. The obsessions are so intrusive that they show up and they compel people to do things in that domain independent of whether or not they happen to be in one location or another. In other words, the thought patterns and the behaviors take over the environment as opposed to the environment driving the thought patterns and behaviors. And I know I've said it multiple times now, but every time that one engages in the compulsion related to the obsession, the obsession simply becomes stronger.

## [00:21:33] Anxiety: Linking Obsessions & Compulsions

So let's drill a little bit deeper into how the obsessions and compulsions relate to one another. If we were to draw a line between the obsessions and the compulsions, that line could be described as anxiety. Now, we need to define what anxiety is and to be quite honest, most of psychology and science can't agree on exactly what anxiety is. Typically the way we think about fear is that it's a heightened state of autonomic arousal — so increased heart rate, increased breathing, sweating, in response to an immediate and present threat or perceived threat. Whereas anxiety, generally speaking in the scientific literature, relates to the same sorts of thought patterns and somatic bodily responses, heart rate, breathing, but without a clear and present danger being in the environment or right there.

And anxiety is really what binds the obsessions and compulsions. Someone will have an intrusive thought — for instance, someone will have the thought that if they turn left on any street, that something bad will happen. That's an obsession. Now, how bad and what the specificity of that bad thing really is will vary. Some people will think, if I turn left, something generally bad will happen, it just makes me feel anxious, so they always insist on going right. Whereas other people will think if I turn left, so and so will die, or I will die, or something terrible will happen.

Beneath that is a feeling of anxiety — a quickening of the heartbeat, a quickening of breathing, a narrowing of one's visual focus. When we are in a state of increased autonomic arousal, alertness, stress, our visual field literally narrows — the aperture of our visual field gets smaller — and that's because of the relationship between the autonomic nervous system and your visual system. It literally sharpens and narrows your focus toward the very thing that the obsessions and the compulsions are focused on.

I want to emphasize that the person with OCD knows it's irrational. They might feel confused because they're having these thoughts, but they know it makes no sense whatsoever and yet it feels as if it would. By taking a right-hand turn — again, in this one particular example — there's a very brief, I should mention very brief, relief of that anxiety at the time of the decision to go right, not left. And then as I alluded to before, there's a reinforcement of the compulsion. By going right, it doesn't create a situation where the person thinks, oh, left would've probably been okay. It reinforces the idea that turning right made me feel better, and going left would've been that much worse. Again, it reinforces the obsession even further.

It's fair to say that up to 70% of people with OCD have some sort of anxiety or elevated anxiety, either directly related to the OCD or indirectly related to the OCD, and it's really hard to tease those apart because OCD can create its own anxiety. And there's also an issue of depression. Having OCD can be very depressing, especially if some of these OCD thoughts and behaviors start to really impede people's ability to function in life. In fact, some people can become suicidally depressed. That's how bad OCD can be for people.

What binds the obsessions and compulsions is anxiety — there's an urgent feeling of a need to get rid of the obsession. And the person feels as if the only way they can do that is to engage in a particular compulsive behavior.

## [00:27:33] OCD & Familial Heredity

There is indeed a genetic component to OCD, although the nature of it isn't exactly clear. And oftentimes when people hear that something has a genetic component, they think it's always directly inherited from a parent, and that's not always the case. There can be genes that surface in siblings or genes that surface in children that are not readily apparent in terms of what we call a phenotype.

Based on twin studies where researchers have examined identical twins, fraternal twins, even identical twins that share the same sack in utero, we can see different levels of what's called genetic concordance. But if we were to just sort of cut a broad swath through all of the genetic data, it's fair to say that about 40 to 50% of OCD cases have some genetic component — some mutation or some inherited aspect that's genetic and that one could point to if they got their genome mapped. Just know that there is a genetic component in about half of people with OCD, but not always.

## [00:29:10] Biological Mechanisms of OCD, Cortico-Striatal-Thalamic Loops

Now as is typical for this podcast, I want to focus on some of the neural mechanisms and chemical systems in the brain and body that generate obsessive-compulsive disorder. Understanding even just a little bit of those biological mechanisms can really help shed light on why particular drug and behavioral treatments and other sorts of treatments work and don't work. This is especially important in the case of OCD where it turns out that the order and type of treatment can really vary according to individual.

So let's take a step back and look at the neural circuitry. What's going on in the brain and body of people with OCD? The brain has two main functions. The brain's main functions are to take care of all the housekeeping stuff — make sure digestion works, make sure the heart beats, make sure you keep breathing no matter what, make sure that you can see, you can hear, you can smell — and then there's an enormous amount of brain real estate that's designed to allow you to predict what's going to happen next, either in the immediate future or in the long-term future, largely done based on your knowledge of the past.

Many studies — dozens if not hundreds — have now identified a particular circuit or loop of brain areas that are interconnected and very active in obsessive-compulsive disorder. That loop includes the cortex, which is kind of the outer shell of the human brain. And it involves an area called the striatum which is involved in action selection and holding back action. The striatum is involved in what's commonly called go and no-go types of behaviors. So every type of behavior like picking up a pen or a mug of coffee involves a go type function. But every time I resist an action, my nervous system is also doing that using this brain structure, the striatum, which includes, among other things, the basal ganglia.

There's a third element in this cortico-striatal loop as it's called, and that's the thalamus. The thalamus is this incredible egg-like structure in the center of your brain that has different channels through it — channels for relaying visual information or auditory information or touch information from your environment up into your cortex, and as a consequence, making certain things that are happening to you and around you apparent to you.

In addition, the thalamus is surrounded by a kind of a shell, something called the thalamic reticular nucleus. This thalamic reticular nucleus serves as a sort of gate as to which information is allowed to pass through up to your conscious experience, and which is not. And that gating mechanism is strongly regulated by the chemical GABA — an inhibitory neurotransmitter that serves to shut down or suppress the activity of other neurons.

So that loop — this cortico-striatal-thalamic loop — is the circuit thought to underlie OCD. Dysfunction in that circuit is what's thought to underlie OCD. This circuit exists in all of us and it can operate in healthy ways, or it can operate in ways that make us feel unhealthy or even suffer from full blown OCD.

## [00:39:36] Cortico-Striatal-Thalamic Loop & OCD

How do we know that this circuit is involved in OCD? We can look to some really interesting studies that involve bringing human subjects into the laboratory and generating their obsessions and compulsions and then imaging their brain using any variety of techniques. What they do typically is bring subjects into the laboratory who have an obsession about germs and contamination and a compulsion to hand wash, and they give these people a sweaty towel that contains the sweat and the odor and the liquid basically from somebody else's hands. They do all this while someone is in a brain scanner or while they're being imaged for positron emission tomography. And what lights up? It's this particular cortico-striatal-thalamic loop.

In addition to that, some of the drug treatments that are effective in some individuals at suppressing obsessions and/or compulsions — such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or SSRIs — when people take those drugs, they see not just a suppression of the obsession and compulsion, but also a suppression of these particular neural circuits. They become less active.

A truly landmark paper published in the journal Science in 2013, first author Susanne Ahmari, done in Rene Hen's lab at Columbia University, is titled "Repeated cortico-striatal stimulation generates persistent OCD-like behavior." What they did is take mice and use optogenetics — technology developed by Karl Deisseroth at Stanford — to stimulate the cortico-striatal circuitry in animals that did not have any OCD-like behavior. When they did that, those animals started grooming incessantly to the point where their hair was falling out. People with OCD, sadly, will hand wash to the point where their hands are actually bleeding and raw. That's how powerful this circuit is.

That collection of data — fMRI, PET scanning in humans, the treatment with SSRIs, and these experiments where researchers have actively triggered these particular circuits in animal models — really points squarely to the fact that the cortico-striatal-thalamic loop is likely to be the basis of OCD.

## [00:46:39] Clinical OCD Diagnosis, Y-BOCS Index

By understanding the underlying mechanism, why certain drugs and behavioral treatments work and don't work will become immediately apparent. That understanding will help you make excellent choices in terms of what sorts of treatments you pursue, what sorts of treatments you abandon, and most importantly, the order and sequence that you pursue and apply those treatments.

Before we go any further, I'd like to give people a little bit of a window into what a diagnosis for OCD would look like. The most commonly used test for OCD is called the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale — the Y-BOCS. So typically someone will go into the clinic either because a family member encouraged them to or because they feel that they're suffering from obsessions and compulsions, and before the clinician would proceed with any kind of direct questions, they would very clearly define what obsessions and compulsions are.

Here I'm actually reading from the Y-BOCS: "Obsessions are unwelcome and distressing ideas, thoughts, images or impulses that repeatedly enter your mind. They may seem to occur against your will. They may be repugnant to you, you may recognize them as senseless and they may not fit your personality." And: "Compulsions, on the other hand, are behaviors or acts that you feel driven to perform although you may recognize them as senseless or excessive. At times, you may try to resist doing them but this may prove difficult. You may experience anxiety that does not diminish until the behavior is completed."

The test includes various categories of obsessions: aggressive obsessions such as fear that one might harm themselves or others; contamination obsessions; sexual obsessions; saving obsessions; moral obsessions such as excess concern with right or wrong or morality; and obsession with need for symmetry and exactness. Then the test transitions over to questions about target symptoms — trying to identify very precisely what the biggest, most catastrophic fear is, what the obsession really relates to. That turns out to be very important in disrupting this cortico-striatal-thalamic loop and getting relief from symptoms.

## [00:51:38] OCD & Fear, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) & Exposure Therapy

The Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale is designed not just to pinpoint what people obsess about or what they feel compelled to do, but to also try and identify what is the fear that's driving all this. Beneath the obsessions and compulsions is a cognitive component that is not at all apparent from someone describing their obsession and from someone displaying their compulsion. The deeper layer to all that is: what is the fear, exactly, if one were to not perform the compulsion — meaning what is the fear that's driving the obsession?

So that brings us to a very powerful category of treatments: cognitive behavioral therapy and in particular, exposure-based cognitive behavioral therapy. I want to distinguish the kinds of cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapies that are done for obsessive-compulsive disorder from the sorts done for other types of mental challenges and disorders, because cognitive behavioral therapy for OCD really has everything to do with identifying the utmost fear.

If you were to push someone in a respectful and kind and caring way aimed at their treatment, you would eventually get to an answer about their deepest fear. Very often, very often, what you find is that people will start to reveal the underlying obsession at a level of detail that both to the clinician and to them can be somewhat astonishing even though they've been living with that detail in their mind for a very long time. Typically, people will have an obsession and then they'll engage in the compulsion as quickly as they can to relieve that obsession. So in many ways, the disease itself prevents people from ever getting to the bottom of that trough, ever getting to the point where they really clearly articulate to themselves exactly what it is that they fear.

What the clinician is actually trying to do is get people to feel more anxiety, not less. Cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapy in the context of OCD, most often involves trying to get people to tolerate, not relieve their anxiety. The goal, again, is to get people to feel the anxiety that normally they are able to at least partially relieve, however briefly, by engaging in the compulsion.

If we think back to the cortico-striatal-thalamic circuit — the cortex is involved in conscious perception, the thalamus and that thalamic reticular nucleus are involved in the passage of certain types of experience up to our conscious perception, and the striatum is involved in this go/no-go type behavior. When OCD is really expressing itself in its fullness, people feel an anxiety around a particular thought and they either have a go (for instance, wash hands) or a no-go (do not turn left) type reaction. By having people progressively reveal their precise source of anxiety, their utmost fear in this context, what happens is they feel enormous amounts of autonomic arousal.

Through a progressive type of exposure, you don't throw people in the deep end in this kind of therapy right off the bat — you gradually ratchet them toward the discussion of exactly what they fear the most, and then eventually move them toward the interruption of the compulsion as they're feeling this extremely elevated anxiety, of course within the context of a supportive clinical setting. But in doing that, what you are teaching people is that the anxiety can exist without the need to engage in the compulsion.

CBT has been shown to be enormously effective for a large number of people with OCD, but not all of them. And oftentimes it requires that it also be used in concert with certain drug treatments, which we're going to talk about in a moment.

## [01:01:56] Unique Characteristics of CBT/Exposure Therapy in OCD Treatment

Let's talk about some of the really unique features of cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapy in the context of OCD that you often don't see in the use of CBT for other types of psychiatric challenges and disorders.

The first element is one of stair-casing — this gradual and progressive increase in the anxiety that you're trying to evoke from the patient. That's done in the context of the office or the laboratory, by a trained and licensed clinician. But then the person leaves, right? They leave the office, they leave the laboratory. And a very vital component of CBT and exposure therapy for people with OCD is that they have and perform what's called homework. This might be seen in other sorts of treatments but for OCD, homework is extremely important, because within the context of a laboratory experiment or the clinic, patients often feel so much support that they can tolerate those heightened levels of anxiety and interrupt their compulsions. Whereas when they get home, oftentimes the familiarity of the environment brings them to a place where all of a sudden those obsessions and compulsions start interacting the same way.

Why would that be? In neuroscience, we have a phrase: conditioned place preference and conditioned place avoidance. Basically it all has to do with the fact that when you feel something repeatedly in a given environment, you tend to feel that same thing again when you return to that or similar environments. In the case of CBT therapy, the reason there's homework is that when people go home, oftentimes that's when they relapse back into their obsessions and compulsions.

I want to highlight something that will come up again a little bit later: substance abuse is very common in people with OCD because of the anxiety component and also because of people's feelings that they just can't escape from the thoughts or behavioral patterns. So alcohol abuse or cannabis abuse, or other forms of narcotics abuse are very common in OCD. Suppressing anxiety is exactly the wrong direction that one should take if the goal is to ultimately relieve or eliminate the OCD.

So we now have two characteristics of CBT exposure therapy that are extremely important for OCD: stair-casing up towards the really bad fear, the really severe and specific articulation and understanding and feeling of how bad things really would be; and the component of homework for the person to be able to create a broader set of contexts in which they can deal with the anxiety, not engage in the compulsions.

And then a very unique feature of treatment of OCD that you don't see in many other psychiatric disorders are home visits. The component of context and location being so vital to the treatment and relief of OCD has inspired many psychiatrists and psychologists to get permission to do home visits — where they actually go visit their patients in their native setting, in their home, in order to see how they're interacting and the particular locations that evoke the most anxiety and the least anxiety. Patients are not always aware of how they're interacting with their home environment — some of these patterns are so deeply ingrained in people that they don't even realize them.

## [01:10:18] CBT/Exposure Therapy & Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)

Much of what I'm going to talk about next relates to the data and indeed the practice of Dr. Helen Blair Simpson, an MD and PhD research scientist at Columbia University School of Medicine, and one of the world's foremost experts on OCD, who both actively researches OCD in humans and treats OCD in her own clinic.

Dr. Simpson describes that the key procedures are exposures done in person and with the actual thing that evokes the obsessions and compulsions — this could be the sweaty towel as described earlier, or could be any number of different triggers done with the patient in real time, in vivo. And it could also be things that are imaginal — sitting somebody down in a chair, in an office, and asking them to imagine the thing that triggers the intrusive thought. The goal is to gradually and progressively increase the level of anxiety, but then to intervene in so-called ritual prevention to prevent the person from engaging in the compulsion. The goals are to disconfirm fears and challenge the beliefs about the obsessions and compulsions, to intervene in the thoughts and the behaviors, and to break the habit of ritualizing and avoiding.

Typically, this is done through two planning sessions with the patient, so describing to the patient what will happen and when it will happen and how long it will happen, so that they're not just thrown into this out of the blue. And then 15 exposure sessions done twice a week or more. So the one thing to really understand about cognitive behavioral therapy is that it can take some period of time — several or more weeks, as many as 10 or 12 weeks.

Dr. Blair Simpson and others have explored what are the best treatments for patients with OCD by comparing cognitive behavioral therapy alone, placebo, as well as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors — SSRIs. What is an SSRI? An SSRI is a drug that prevents the re-uptake of serotonin at the synapse. The neurotransmitter serotonin is released into the synapse by one neuron and SSRIs prevent that serotonin from being gobbled back up. As a consequence, there's more serotonin around to have more of an effect over time — the net effect being more serotonergic transmission, more serotonin available for use.

In the Foa, Liebowitz et al. 2005 study published in the American Journal of Psychiatry, they compared cognitive behavioral therapy, SSRIs, placebo, and cognitive behavioral therapy plus SSRIs, in a 12-week study done twice a week. Placebo did not reduce the obsessions or compulsions to any significant degree. However, cognitive behavioral therapy had a dramatic effect — it reduced the Y-BOCS score from 25 down to about 11 by four weeks, a huge drop in the severity of symptoms. The SSRIs had a significant but smaller effect — symptoms continued to improve from four to eight weeks and flattened somewhat by 12 weeks, but the severity of symptoms was still much greater than those receiving cognitive behavioral therapy alone. And the combination of CBT and SSRIs together did not lead to any further decrease in OCD symptoms beyond CBT alone.

This points to the idea that cognitive behavioral therapy is the most effective treatment. However, despite the demonstrated power of CBT for the treatment of OCD, most people are given drug treatments simply because of the availability of those drug treatments. And most people with OCD do not actually seek evidence-based treatment at all — which is a tragic thing, in large part because of shame and other barriers.

The important thing to understand here is that while there are treatments we could say are best based on the data, what happens when people who are already taking SSRIs initiate cognitive behavioral therapy? The good news is that when you add cognitive behavioral therapy to someone who's already taking SSRIs, that further improves their symptoms. So for those of you who have sought treatment and are taking an SSRI, the ideal scenario really would be to combine the drug treatment with cognitive behavioral therapy, always in close discussion with a licensed physician.

## [01:22:30] Considerations with SSRIs & Prescription Drug Treatments

I should mention what some of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are. Things like clomipramine — which is not entirely selective and can impact other neurotransmitter or neuromodulator systems. The more selective SSRIs, at least the classic ones, are fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine (Luvox), paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram. There are about six classic SSRIs, some of them like citalopram are used in children and are available in pediatric doses.

All of these drugs — in fact, I think we can say all drugs — have side effects. The question is how detrimental those side effects are to daily life. The SSRIs are well known to have effects on appetite. They can have effects on libido — for instance, they can reduce sex drive, sometimes in a dose-dependent way. Side effects can be transient, showing up and then disappearing, or they can surface later after some period of use. That's why it's really important to explore any kind of drug treatment, SSRI or otherwise, in close communication with a psychiatrist who really understands the pharmacokinetics and has a lot of patient history and experience with them.

## [01:25:17] Serotonin & Cognitive Flexibility, Psilocybin Studies

What I'm about to tell you next is most certainly going to come as a big surprise, which is that despite the fact that the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors can be effective in reducing the symptoms of OCD, there is very little, if any evidence, that the serotonin system is disrupted in OCD. This is a somewhat consistent theme in the field of psychiatry — that a given drug can be very effective or even partially effective in reducing symptoms, and yet there is very little evidence that that particular system is what's causal for OCD.

One of the more thorough reviews in recent years was published in 2021 by Christopher Pittenger at Yale University School of Medicine, titled "Pharmacotherapeutic Strategies and New Targets in OCD." This review describes that the serotonin system isn't really disrupted in OCD and yet SSRIs can be very effective.

There is currently a lot of interest in whether or not some of the psychedelics, in particular psilocybin, can be effective in the treatment of OCD. Psilocybin has been shown in clinical trials — in particular those done at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine by Matthew Johnson and others — to be very effective in the treatment of certain kinds of major depression. Currently the exploration of psilocybin for the treatment of OCD has not yielded similar results, although the studies are ongoing. The serotonin 2A receptor and the serotonin 1A receptors are primary targets for psilocybin, which is why they're worth exploring.

One thing to point out is that even though serotonin has not been directly implicated in OCD, serotonin and the general systems of serotonin have been shown to impact cognitive flexibility and inflexibility. In animals that have their serotonin depleted or in humans with very low levels of serotonin, you can see evidence of cognitive inflexibility, challenges in task switching. So that does indirectly implicate serotonin in some of the aspects of OCD.

One of the things that really unifies the behavioral treatments and the drug treatments is that they take some period of time. Some relief from symptoms seems to show up around four weeks and certainly by eight weeks for both cognitive behavioral therapy and the SSRIs, but it's really at the 10 to 12 week stage when someone's been doing these twice a week cognitive behavioral sessions or taking a SSRI for 10 to 12 weeks that the really significant reduction in OCD symptoms starts to really show up.

## [01:31:50] Neuroleptics & Neuromodulators

Sadly, in the case of OCD, there is a significant population that simply does not respond to CBT or to SSRIs, or to their combination, which is why psychiatrists also explore the combination of SSRIs and neuroleptics or drugs that tap into the so-called dopamine system or the glutamate system.

Just to really remind you what neurotransmitters and neuromodulators do: neurotransmitters are typically involved in the rapid communication between neurons. The two most common neurotransmitters are glutamate — which is excitatory, meaning when it's released into the synapse, it causes the next neuron to be more active — and GABA which is inhibitory, meaning when it's released into the synapse, it typically encourages the next neuron to be less electrically active. The neuromodulators, by contrast — like dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine, and acetylcholine — tend to act a little bit more broadly. They can change the general patterns of activity in the brain, making certain circuits more likely to be active and other circuits less likely to be active. You can think of them as kind of activating playlists or genres of activity in the brain.

Anytime you take one of these drugs, they're not acting specifically on the cortico-striatal-thalamic circuit — that's the future of psychiatry. When you take a drug, it acts systemically. So it's impacting serotonin in your gut, it's also impacting serotonin in other areas of the brain. Likewise, if you take a neuroleptic like haloperidol or something that reduces dopamine transmission, well, then it's going to have some motor effects because dopamine is involved in the generation of motor sequences and smooth limb movement. That's why people with Parkinson's who don't have much dopamine will get a resting tremor.

I encourage patients and careful systematic exploration of different drug treatments for OCD always with the careful and close guidance and oversight of a psychiatrist, because psychiatrists really understand which side effect profiles make it likely that you can or cannot take a given drug at a given dose.

## [01:36:09] OCD & Cannabis, THC & CBD

Now, there are other forms of drug treatments that have been explored for OCD, and one place of exploration is cannabis. A number of people try and self medicate for OCD. There is some clinical evidence that cannabis can reduce anxiety. Earlier we were talking about not reducing anxiety but learning anxiety tolerance in order to deal with and treat OCD in the context of cognitive behavioral therapies — that doesn't necessarily rule out cannabis as a candidate for treatment. And in fact, this has been explored.

A study from Dr. Blair Simpson herself — entitled "Acute effects of cannabinoids on symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A human laboratory study" — looked at 14 adults with OCD who had prior experience with cannabis. This was randomized and placebo-controlled, with the cannabis smoked. They had different conditions: placebo (0% THC), 7% THC, or 0.4% CBD and THC. This study was done in 2020 and was the first placebo-controlled investigation of cannabis in adults with OCD.

Their conclusions: the data suggest that smoked cannabis, whether containing primarily THC or CBD, has little acute impact on OCD symptoms and yielded smaller reductions in anxiety compared to placebo. So they did not see an ameliorative effect from cannabis or CBD on the symptoms of OCD.

## [01:39:29] Ketamine Treatment

There are other sorts of drug treatments gaining popularity for OCD, at least in the research realm. One treatment that is legal, at least by prescription in the United States, is ketamine. Ketamine acts on the glutamate system — it tends to disrupt the relationship between glutamate and the so-called NMDA receptor, which is special in the nervous system because when glutamate binds to the NMDA receptor, it tends to offer the opportunity for that particular synapse to get stronger, so-called neuroplasticity. Ketamine tends to block that binding.

Ketamine therapy is now being used quite extensively for the treatment of trauma and for depression. Ketamine therapies are being explored for OCD. As of now, the data look somewhat promising, but there's still a lot more work that needs to be done. The more extensive clinical trials have not happened yet. The smaller studies revealed that some patients do get some relief from ketamine therapy for OCD, but there was nothing overwhelmingly pointing to ketamine as a magic bullet for OCD treatment.

## [01:41:43] Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS)

Another treatment that's becoming somewhat common, or at least people are commonly excited about, is transcranial magnetic stimulation. This is the use of a magnetic coil — completely noninvasive — placed on one portion of the skull, and one can direct magnetic energy toward particular areas of the brain to either suppress or activate particular brain regions.

There are some interesting data showing that if TMS is applied to areas of the brain involved in the generation of motor action — the so-called motor areas, or supplementary motor areas — while people think about or have intrusive thoughts, the TMS coil can interrupt the motor behaviors, the compulsive behaviors. And at least in a small cohort of studies and a small number of patients within those studies, this has been shown to be effective not just while the coil is on the head, but after the treatment in reducing OCD symptoms by disrupting the tendency for the compulsive behavior to be so automatic.

One of the key features of OCD, especially if it's been around for a while, is that there isn't really a pause between the obsession and the compulsion — somebody's walking down the street generating the compulsive behaviors in rapid succession. TMS seems to intervene in these various fast processes.

I want to nail this point home: there's excitement about the combination of TMS with drug treatments, or the combination of TMS with cognitive behavioral therapy. In most cases, psychiatric challenges and disorders are going to respond best to a combination of behavioral treatment that's ongoing in the laboratory and clinical setting, but also in the home setting where there's homework, maybe even home visits; drug treatments, which are often a terrific augment; and now we are living in the age of brain-machine interface. So transcranial magnetic stimulation is noninvasive, can have some effect, but most laboratories I'm aware of are using TMS in combination with drug therapies.

## [01:46:22] Cannabis CBD & Focus

I want to make one additional point about cannabis CBD as it relates to obsessive-compulsive disorder. In my discussion with Dr. Paul Conti a few weeks ago, we were talking about cannabis and its various uses, and he mentioned that one of the main effects of cannabis is to tighten focus and to enhance concentration on and thoughts about one particular thing. If you accept the idea that cannabis increases focus, and you think about OCD and the networks involved, and you think about the anxiety and the relationship between the obsession and compulsion — well, then it shouldn't come as any surprise that cannabis did not improve the symptoms of OCD, because if anything, it would increase focus on the obsessions and the compulsions.

## [01:47:50] Thoughts Are Not Actions

Before I go on to hormones, I want to point out something that I realize I probably should have said earlier, which is one of the key things for someone with OCD to come to understand if they're going to experience any relief of their symptoms — whether or not they're doing drug treatments or behavioral treatments or otherwise — is that thoughts are not as bad as actions. Thoughts are not as bad as actions.

One of the kind of rules that people with OCD seem to adopt for themselves is that thoughts are truly the equivalent of actions. They'll have an intrusive thought and start to feel that they must suppress them with behaviors. But one of the powerful elements of treatment for OCD is to really support the patient and make them realize that thoughts are just thoughts and that everyone has disturbing thoughts. And that oftentimes those disturbing thoughts arise at the most inconvenient and sometimes seemingly most inappropriate circumstances.

This relates to a whole larger discussion about what are thoughts and why do they surface — how come when you stand at the edge of a bridge, even if you do not want to jump off, you think about jumping off. This has to do with the fact that your nervous system, as a prediction machine, is oftentimes testing possibilities.

The big difference between a thought and an action is that the nervous system is, in one case, not translating those patterns of thinking into motor sequences. That nerdy way of saying thoughts aren't actions can be helpful for people if they really think about that and use it as an opportunity to realize that, first of all, they're not crazy. They're not thinking and feeling this stuff because they're bad or evil. This idea that thoughts are not as bad as actions and that thoughts can be tolerated and the anxiety around thoughts can be tolerated and over time can diminish — that's a very powerful hallmark theme of the treatment of OCD.

## [01:51:27] Hormones, Cortisol, DHEA, Testosterone & GABA

So what about hormones in OCD? This has been explored, albeit not as extensively as I would have liked. One particularly interesting study is entitled "Neurosteroid Levels in Patients with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder," first author Erbay. The objective was to explore serum neurosteroid levels in people with OCD. They compared serum levels of a number of different hormones: progesterone, pregnenolone, DHEA, cortisol, and testosterone. This was done in 30 patients with OCD and 30 healthy controls, ages 18 to 49.

The basic takeaway from the study: in females with OCD, there was evidence for significantly elevated cortisol and DHEA. Cortisol is well known to be associated with the stress system. In male patients with OCD, there was evidence for increased cortisol and also significant reductions in testosterone — which should not surprise us because cortisol and testosterone more or less compete for their own production, both being derived from the molecule cholesterol. When cortisol goes up in general, testosterone goes down and vice versa.

The most interesting aspect of this study is the relationship between DHEA, cortisol, and testosterone in terms of GABA. GABA — again, this inhibitory neurotransmitter that tends to quiet certain neuronal pathways — and DHEA is known to be a potent antagonist of the GABA system. Testosterone is also known to tap into the GABA system — typically, when testosterone is elevated, GABA transmission is at least slightly elevated. So here we have a situation in which the pattern of hormones in females and males with OCD are different from those in people without OCD such that GABA transmission is altered, with the net effect being an overall reduction in GABA.

GABA, as an inhibitory neurotransmitter broadly speaking, is associated with lower levels of anxiety, and it tends to create balance within various neural circuits. So the situation with OCD is one in which, for whatever reason, certain hormones are elevated in females and certain hormones are elevated in males, and those hormones differ between males and females, and yet they both funnel into a system where GABAergic transmission in the brain is reduced — and as a consequence, there's likely to be overall levels of increased excitation in certain networks, bringing us back to this cortico-striatal-thalamic loop.

I have not found studies that have explored adjusting testosterone levels through exogenous administration, or that have focused on reducing DHEA in females. But because we know that hormones impact neuromodulators and neurotransmitters, and that those neuromodulators and neurotransmitters play an intimate role in the generation and the treatment of OCD, it stands to reason that manipulations of those hormone systems might prove useful in adjusting the symptoms of OCD.

Many of the symptoms of OCD show up right around the time of puberty. Many children develop OCD as early as three or four, or six, seven, ten, in adolescence, and certainly around puberty and in young adulthood. It is rare that people will develop OCD very late in life around 40 or older — most often when you look at their clinical history, you find that either they were hiding it or being suppressed in some way.

## [02:00:55] Holistic Treatments: Mindfulness Meditation & OCD

A number of listeners are probably interested in the non-typical or holistic treatments for OCD. Dr. Blair Simpson's lab has at least one study exploring the role of mindfulness meditation for the treatment of OCD. The data are a little bit complicated. Good things are happening in terms of the exploration of things like meditation and other non-traditional or holistic forms of treatment for psychiatric disorders because of the division of complementary health that's now been launched by the National Institutes of Health.

Most of the data on mindfulness meditation shows that it increases the ability to focus. This brings us back to a kind of repeating theme today — that increased focus may not be the best thing for somebody with OCD because it might increase focus on the obsession and/or compulsion. It turns out that mindfulness meditation can be useful in the treatment of OCD, but mainly by way of how it impacts the focus on and the ability to engage in cognitive behavioral therapies. It's very unlikely to be a direct effect of meditation on relieving the symptoms — rather it seems that meditation is increasing focus on things like cognitive behavioral therapy homework and indirectly improving the symptoms of OCD.

## [02:03:28] Nutraceuticals & Supplements: Myo-Inositol, Glycine

Somewhat surprisingly, there have also been a fairly large number of studies exploring how nutraceuticals — supplements available over the counter — can impact the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. A useful review is entitled "Nutraceuticals in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: a review of mechanistic and clinical evidence," published in 2011.

In this review, they describe effects of 5-HTP and tryptophan — things that are in the serotonin pathway — which would make sense given what we know about the SSRIs. These do have significant effects in improving or reducing the symptoms of OCD in a somewhat similar way to some of the SSRIs. But you have to be careful — anything that's going to tap into a given neurochemical system to the same degree may very likely have the same sorts of side effects that a prescription drug would.

One compound I like to focus on is inositol — specifically myo-inositol. It does appear that 900 milligrams of inositol can improve sleep and can reduce anxiety. I've been taking 900 milligrams of myo-inositol either alone or in combination with my existing sleep toolkit. I can say the sleep I've been getting on inositol is extremely deep and does seem to lead to enhanced levels of focus and alertness during the day.

Inositol has been explored in a bunch of different contexts, including for ticks in OCD. I confess that I have been taking 900 milligrams of myo-inositol, in addition to my existing toolkit for sleep which consists of magnesium threonate, apigenin, and theanine.

Now, most of the studies of inositol have explored very high dosages — like even 10 or 12 grams per day — and they do report that some subjects actually stop taking the inositol because of gastric discomfort. There's also some interesting data about glycine — another amino acid which also acts as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain — taken at very high dosages. 18 grams of inositol — these are very, very high dosages used in these studies. Nonetheless, there's some interesting data about inositol leading to some alleviation of OCD symptoms or partial alleviation of OCD symptoms in as little as two weeks after initiating the supplement protocol.

I think there's a great future for these nutraceuticals, and there really needs to be an exploration of these nutraceuticals in combination with behavioral therapies.

## [02:09:45] OCD vs. Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder

Way back at the beginning of the episode, I alluded to the fact that OCD is one thing — it's truly a disorder and it's truly debilitating and it's extremely common — and then there's this other thing called obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, which is distinct and does not have the intrusive component. People with OCPD don't feel overwhelmed or overtaken by these thoughts; rather, they find that the obsessions can sometimes serve them or they even welcome them.

We've come to a point in human history, in large part because of social media and also in large part because of more discussions being held about mental health, where terms like trauma, depression, OCD have come into the common vernacular so that people will say, "Ah, you're so OCD," or "I was traumatized by that." We should be very careful in the use of certain types of language, especially language that has real psychiatric and psychological definitions, because it can really draw us off course in providing relief for some of these syndromes.

Fortunately, there are beautiful data from Dr. Blair Simpson's lab — a study, first author Pinto, entitled "Capacity to delay reward differentiates obsessive-compulsive disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder." The methods were to take 25 people with OCD and 25 people with OCPD and 25 people who have both, and 25 so-called healthy controls. They took clinical assessments and then took a number of tests that probed their ability to defer gratification — something called in the laboratory delayed discounting.

The conclusion: obsessive-compulsive and OCPD subjects both showed impairments in their psychosocial functioning and quality of life. They both had compulsive behavior. However, the individuals with OCPD discounted the value of delayed gratification significantly less than those with OCD — meaning they are really good at delaying gratification. They can concentrate very intensely and perform very intensely in ways that allow them to instill order.

People with obsessive-compulsive disorder are absolutely fixated on certain ideas and those ideas are intrusive — that's the hallmark theme. And by contrast, OCPD is characterized by an enhanced capacity to delay reward. You can see why that would lead to very different outcomes. People with OCPD can actually leverage that personality disorder to perform better in certain domains of life — architecture, or anything that involves instilling a ton of order, maybe a sushi chef, or in science where data collection and analysis require precision.

The key takeaway here is that when we use the words obsessive-compulsive, it's very important to highlight that obsessive-compulsive disorder is very intrusive — it involves intrusive thoughts and it interrupts normal functioning in life. Whereas obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, while it can interrupt normal functioning in life, it also can be productive and can enhance functioning in life.

## [02:20:53] Superstitions, Compulsions & Obsessions

Before we conclude, I want to touch on something that I think a lot of people experience and that's superstitions. One particular study I'm a big fan of is the work of Bence Olveczky at Harvard. He studies motor sequences and motor learning, and has beautiful data on how people learn, for instance, a tennis swing. The takeaway is that the amount of error or variation from swing to swing is dramatically reduced as they acquire skill. They also explore animal models — in particular, rats pressing sequences of buttons and levers to obtain a reward.

Olveczky's lab has published beautiful data showing that as animals and humans come to learn a particular motor sequence, very often they will introduce motor patterns in that sequence that are irrelevant to the outcome and yet that persist. If you've ever watched a game of baseball, you've seen this — the pitcher will do the same sequence of completely irrelevant motor patterns before each and every single pitch: touching the back of their ear before they bring the ball to their chin, adjusting their hat. Similarly, rats trained to hit levers and step on a pedal will introduce extra motor patterns — shaking their tail, turning their head — that have nothing to do with obtaining the outcome. Those get introduced because somehow, since they were performed prior to successful trials, the rat or the human baseball pitcher comes to believe in some way that it was involved in generating the outcome. Hence superstition.

I confess I have a few superstitions. I occasionally will knock on wood. Some people have superstitions that border on or even become compulsions — they really come to believe that if they don't knock on wood, something terrible is going to happen. Superstitions are beliefs that we, on an individual scale, come to believe are linked to the probability of an outcome when in fact we know in our rational minds they have no real relationship to the outcome.

Superstitions can become full-blown compulsions and obsessions when we repeat them often enough that they become automatic. People with OCD, yes, tend to have more superstitions. People with more superstitions tend to have a tendency towards OCD. If you think way back to the first part of this episode — what does your brain do? It's a prediction machine. Your neural circuits have an enormous amount of biological investment in trying to make your world predictable and to try and give you control, or at least the sense of control over that world.

Low-level superstitions, moderate superstitions represent a kind of healthy range of behaviors aimed at generating predictability that don't disrupt normal function. OCPD, provided it's not too severe, would represent the next level along that continuum. And then OCD, as I pointed out earlier, is really a case of highly debilitating, highly intrusive overtaking of neural circuitry over our thoughts and behaviors — that requires very dedicated, very persistent, and very effective treatments in order to stop those obsessions and compulsions and the anxiety that links them. And fortunately, as we described earlier, such treatments exist.

## [02:31:00] Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel — that's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can also leave us up to a five star review and give us feedback. The best place to give us written feedback, however, is on the YouTube channel within the comment section.

Please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast — that's the best way to support us. The Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements because Momentous Supplements are of the very highest quality, they ship everywhere in the world, and we wanted to have one location where people could go in order to access the supplements we discuss here. If you go to livemomentous.com/huberman, you can find those supplements.

If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. There I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the content on the Huberman Lab Podcast, and some of which is distinct. If you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, this is a monthly newsletter, completely zero cost. Go to hubermanlab.com, click on newsletter, and you can see example newsletters — for instance, a toolkit for sleep. You can download that right away without even signing up. You can get the toolkit for neuroplasticity, for the use of cold, for the use of heat in health, and more.

In closing, I'd like to thank you for this in-depth discussion about the mechanisms and various treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder and some of the related disorders. And as always, thank you for your interest in science.
